Live Class 3 — Cognitive Analytics and Social Skills for Professional (BS605)
Faculty: Ms. Ayushi Pandwal
Date: Sep 2, 2026 | Time: 2:00 - 2:50 Pm
Source: https://amigo.amityonline.com/mod/page/view.php?id=377682
Captions: English (auto-generated) from Vimeo

--- Transcript ---

IT, is this live now with the students?
Okay.
Good afternoon, everyone. How are you all?
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Just give me five minutes. The students are joining. Right?
After five minutes, let me start the session. Right?
Okay,
dear students, we will shortly just begin the discussion.
Right? How many of you have studied what we discussed in the previous
topic?
Good afternoon, Ayushi, Saurav.
Okay, so let's just start our discussion for today.
Right.
In today's session, we try to explore the different topics,
and the different terminologies
that will help us understand the subject more.
Right?
You not only have
conflict and the skills that are needed
for your professional excellence, but we do have emotional
intelligence. Right? We do have different
connotations of topics that are
useful for your professional excellence.
It's about attitudes,
inclusive practices, emotional intelligence, situational
leadership,
and all other theories there. Fine.
So you all are with me in this class.
Just give me a thumbs up if we are ready to start the session, guys.
Yes.
Okay.
So I want you all
to take a moment first,
and answer me this
question that I have posted here.
So when you face anything that is
uncertain for you,
you do not
have premonition about the same. You have not expected about the
same. Now, what generally is your first
reaction in such situations? And these situations can
arise in our personal life and even in our
professional life also. Right? So here,
if you have been asked this,
if you face this kind of
situation that you have not expected, then what
generally are your reaction? So do you consider
yourself as a person who is immediately looking for certain
kind of solution? Or you
worry for that particular thing and then you ask what
would have been wrong? And either you are a kind of
personality that is having certain avoidant traits, in which
you feel that, "I want to avoid dealing for this particular thing for a
while," or you are a person whose approach is to
take help, take advice from people.
So if you're having these options and this is the
scenario, then what is your natural
response to it? So we have 12 learners right now,
and I want to see at least four to five responses from you in the
chat section. So can I have a look on the responses,
guys? Let's brainstorm this. And why we are discussing this,
because we want to understand the different patterns of
different traits that is under your syllabus.
And before that, we need to build that kind of self-awareness.
Right?
Yeah.
So all of you, please write down your response first
and let us build upon that discussion. Right? Yeah.
You can write down more than one option if you feel so, guys.
It's totally fine.
It's more about understanding ourselves. Right.
Let
me start
reading. So Ayushi has written, "I'll choose option A."
Okay, so you feel that you immediately look for that particular
solution.
Then Kartika says that she avoid
dealing things for a while. Okay, Saurav says
either you are looking immediately for a solution, or you ask
someone for advice or support.
Then
Arpan says it depends on the type of challenge. Okay.
Whether an issue can be solved by me or something beyond our control.
Okay. So this is also one of the consideration that you
think.
Okay, good.
So majority
is saying that there is something as control, right?
Now, what is that control, that perceived control that we
think exists for us? Is
the locus of control. Right? And now what is locus of
control? So when we feel that
we are cause of certain event, or when we feel that
certain external factors are the cause of that particular event.
So we can divide the locus of control into two parts.
Either it can be internal, either it can be external.
Right?
Yes.
Okay. Now, let us move a bit forward-
Have you guys heard about neuroplasticity?
I've taken different sessions also on this.
Why I wanted to include it in this class, because this class is also
about inculcating certain skills among us
in order to build upon our emotional intelligence and resilience.
So when we talk about neuroplasticity, it is also
how do you train your brain, how you wire your
brain to react in certain situations,
right? And why it is
associated with so many factors, be it lifelong learning,
right? Be it how do you recover from certain things?
How do you adapt to it? What is the idea of your personal
growth?
Or
is your brain constantly changing or rewiring?
So basically what we feel is when you
learn things, certain learnings in
your system, in your brain, become strongly
connected, right? And since those learnings
become strongly connected, that means
that the connections have become more strong.
They have wired very hard,
right? And since the connections have wired hard, it is a bit
difficult for us to again rewire our brain and inculcate
new form of learnings. Right? So
what we say, we say that we try to
focus on different things in our environment.
We try to focus on how we can build new connection so
that our brain is always flexibly changing and
learning and adapting to new things.
Right?
Yes.
Great. So how many of you have ever tried using
your
non-dominant hand?
How many of you have tried using things from your non-dominant
hand? Because this is a different small, small ways in which you
try to train your brain. You know that today we are going to do
something creative, something different, and because of it,
you are learning new connections. Right? This is an example.
You
try to take a different path to office or your
workplace or your home. All these things in which
you are trying to make your brain feel that, "Hey, I'm
doing something different, and it is unbreaking that automatic cycle of my
brain, which has made me adapt to it."
Right? Now, looking to different researches that has been done
across globes, you will come to know that
when we try to focus on our cognitive
skills, it's very important for us to
sorry,
to brush our thinking thought pattern.
Now, your thought are related to different scenarios.
It first starts from understanding the stimulus that is there in the
surrounding, and not only understanding the things there in the
surrounding. Then from the stimulus, you try to
interpret it, and we say interpret
after interpreting it, things from the surrounding after interpreting
it, then you tend to
behave. Yeah. So the cycle is stimulus,
emotion or feeling, and then how I am behaving,
right?
So thus you get to know this thing that how
my brain is capable of recognizing any new
learning, any new experience that is there, and
how it is involving skills that tend
to improve emotional regulation, resilience,
right? All those things. Fine. So if we look to different
researches that have been done, if we talk about 2025
research that was very recent and was done in Frontiers
journal in Neurology, it tells you that your
brain is capable of learning things and rewiring
things and adapting, but it also regulate
different things. It improves your emotional regulation, and emotional
regulation is very important factor in enhancing your emotional
intelligence and of course, your resilience part.
Right. So emotional intelligence starts from the very first component, that
is understanding emotions, then of course, labeling emotions,
appraising the emotions, generalizing the emotions, and managing them.
Right. In that sense,
your brain's ability to recognize something new and
adapt you is definitely there. Right?
Then you have
different
researches. It also tells you whenever we try to do something new, like we
try to learn some new language, your
brain connection also strengthen, right?
So it is also associated with
making your
brain young again. Fine. So this idea of a
young mind, a young brain, come into habit.
You are making your brain very flexible.
You are not letting your brain rot on the previous connections,
right? You're always trying to do something different.
Fine.
Then we get to know that there is always a physical connection
with the psychological one.
Right. We talk about different exercises.
So even exercising can strengthen your brain
memory, that exercise can also improve that
functioning that is there.
It enhances sense of plasticity, it also your growth
factors. And of course, the growth factors are
not just physical, but also psychological. Right?
And then we say that, have
you ever indulged yourself in practices that
also tend to relax you? Now, how many of you have
ever tried doing meditation or something to
control your attention or regulation?
Only one?
13 learners are here. I want to see response of everyone,
guys.
Can I see some more response? And you can write no also, if you are
saying that you haven't practiced it.
Okay.
So there are people who have been doing it, okay,
in the same way time. Okay.
Sometimes. Great.
Okay, so Kartika is saying sometimes she has tried.
Okay.
Now, there is certain difference in your brain
activity when you are involving yourself in
practices. You are trying to concentrate on certain things, be
it meditation. Regularly. Oh, Ayesha is saying she's
regularly meditating. So how is the
difference? How you have noticed the difference and
how it has changed for you, the connotation of your brain, your mind,
your health. Has it also significantly
changed your equations
personally? And you know how it has aided on
the improvement of cognitive skills.
Yes. Okay.
More patient. Right? More patient with the process.
Good.
That's really great.
That's really great. You
guys have been indulging yourself in such meaningful practices.
Very nice.
Okay. So now we're looking to a research that
was done in Nature in 2026 only, and that kind
of highlighted that how
people are having some exceptional memories, and they can
continue produce new neurons. Fine.
But all of that needs us to evolve our brain
patterns, right? It cannot simply come to all of us, so we
need to evolve ourselves. Now,
if you try to understand
that cycle, how this particular cycle runs, you need to
understand that how everything is intertwined with each other.
It really starts from that perception, but before the perception, the
stimulus part is there. So your sensory
processing shapes the idea of perception,
and it will give you cognition. What are you thinking?
What are your thoughts? What are your thinking patterns?
And of course, it will affect the decision-making part of
you, behavior part of you, and what kind of
emotions you will be feeling. Right?
So any kind of repeated thought pattern will be shaping the
neural pathways, and it will be influencing the
emotional reactions, your behavior,
decision-making, right? All of that is
connected. Now, this cycle is really important.
You can take the snapshot of this particular thing, that how
each component is
connected to each other. And when
we say that certain behavior is repeated, right--
Wait, sorry. I changed it by mistake. Yes.
So when you say that certain behavior is repeated, that means that
particular learning is also strengthened, right?
So your personality, your emotional habits,
it do affect how are you performing personally
or professionally,
right? Your relations, your resilience, how you are
maintaining the same. So all of that is
being affected by each other,
right? Now, any questions till now, guys?
Any questions that you want to ask?
Yes. Okay, what question?
What about others?
Okay. So I'm assuming that no questions till now,
right?
The repeated pattern,
they kind of oscillate. They create that
to-and-fro movement. And it also affect how your
neural pathways are connected to each other, right?
So we are saying that there are certain practices that we tend to repeat, and it
becomes a part of our behavior. Our behavior can
be on the observable side, or it can be on the
unobservable side, right? And what do we call the behavior that is
on the observable side? In the previous session, I told you guys.
What is that behavior that we can observe, and what is the behavior we cannot
observe? Tell me.
Ayesha tell me, what is overt behavior versus covert behavior?
I have multiple times told you guys about this thing,
and now I want to hear the response.
Tell me what is the difference between overt behavior and covert behavior?
Attender is asking, it was just a kind of human brain, right, ma'am?
Like what? Previous one.
Overt is observable, good. And covert?
Basically, your cognition comes to which part?
Yeah, it was human brain. We tried to understand
different components of your emotion,
behavior, and brain.
Arpan, thank you for stating this. Overt is observable.
That means behavior that can be seen, right?
So whatever my body language, you can see it, notice it comes under overt.
Now, the thoughts I'm thinking comes under cognition.
And cognition comes under covert behavior.
Yes or no, guys?
Yes, good.
Very good. So your repeated practice
is overt, right? Your overt behavior, whatever you
have repeated, those patterns, will also
strengthen the neural pathways or the covert behavior.
Tell me of what behavior we are talking about.
We are talking about overt or covert behavior.
Here, when we talk about strengthening your neural pathways.
Both? Okay, and how are we talking about both?
So we're talking about strengthening the thoughts
and
the behavior part.
So how is the pathway also activated?
Right.
By cognition. See, everything is linked.
Even when we talk about the overt part, but it is
also linked by the emotion that we feel.
So how do phobias operate?
Right. For some people, they are frightened of
spider, but some people are not.
How does it operate? For everyone, the stimulus is same, that they
saw a spider. Okay. Now they saw a spider,
and for some person, the thought is fearful.
For some people, if the spider imagery is fearful,
that means their emotion would be frightened.
Hannah. That means your behavior would be that I want to
get rid of it, right? For some people, it would be a bit of neutral,
and the emotion is not evoked. That, no,
I'm having a bit phobia, or I'm having a bit fear.
Right. So in this way, it also depends on
the subjective part. But that cognitive appraisal
part, right? That when I see spider, I fear.
That is also that I have strengthened my neural pathways.
Right? I have repeated those particular thoughts, I have
repeated those particular behavior that have created
that frequent pathway which make me feel,
that I have fear of it.
And then once the pathway becomes more
and more strong, it becomes easy for that
particular behavior to permanently get registered.
Right. So what are learning? Learning is something that
is relatively permanent change in my behavior.
Fine. And then we say that there are certain learning that are
happening unconsciously. Now, unconsciously means my
brain is not aware of them, but it is becoming part
of my
learning, right? What are those learning?
Can you tell me certain behaviors that we all exhibit maybe in our
workplace, in our professional life, but those are very
automatic behavior, and we are not conscious of those?
Tell me. In your full day. Now take two minutes,
think it. In your full day, what are certain those
behavior, four to five behavior, which are running in autopilot
mode? Everyone have to respond to this question, okay?
Only one answer I saw, reflex action, Arpan has
written. What about others?
Tell me some behavior, guys, that are your automatic
behavior.
Hurry up.
Okay, I'm getting answers. I'll wait for one minute
for you all to respond.
Only two responses, guys. What about others?
What about others?
You guys feel there are no automatic responses?
How many of you drive?
Okay, now I'm getting responses.
Saurav said, "Agency to go back, okay, after 5:00 or 6:00 PM.
Go to hang when boss is not there, okay?
Giving Gen Z reasons for taking leave, sleeping
during work, keeping work pending for the next day."
So what are you referring to? Are these automatic behavior you are saying?
But these are not automatic behavior.
These are behavior that are responses, and
also a bit subjective to one's own personality.
Automatic behavior are those behavior that are involuntary in
nature. Right? Your brain is not aware that this is
happening, and it happens within fraction of second.
Your reflex action, your certain behavior
that are done by involuntary muscles.
Aggressiveness. Aggressiveness can also be unconsciously
activated.
Yes. Yes, by the spine. Your central nervous
system comes into play.
Right.
Yes.
Good.
So your unconscious learning, this is the learning
that is happening unconsciously, right?
Gratitude.
Gratitude can come under conscious learning,
not unconscious learning. So you feel that
thanking something, acknowledging someone, or gratitude is
unconscious. Do you feel so?
Wait, I'm sorry.
My screen is visible, right? Okay.
Yeah. So you feel that gratitude is
conscious? Unconscious. No. Gratitude is
conscious.
Right?
Things involving speaking, things involving
listening to people is definitely conscious.
Right?
Certain behavior
is unconscious. I was talking about driving.
How many of you think that you are very conscious when you drive?
Think that each day when you drive, you go to home, you go to office, you are very
conscious. Like you know what is happening in your surrounding.
You are very conscious while choosing your path and all of that.
And you feel that your brain is not running into autopilot mode at that particular
time. When you brush, you do your
daily activities, your brain conscious or kind of unconscious when you get
ready?
Sudden fear. Yes. Any instantaneous
thing that has invoked the involuntary reactions,
definitely that is also under unconscious part.
Sometimes calling during driving, okay, or talking with passengers.
That is part of conscious. That is not part of unconscious, Saurav.
So when you call during drive or you
talk with people
during traveling, it is conscious.
Right.
So there are some behavior that are
learned by unconscious. There are some behavior that are
learned by practice consciously. Right?
But both become the part of our learnings, and if we
strengthen those pathways, it becomes our pattern or
practice. Right? So if we strengthen these
neural pathways, definitely it will become a strong learning
for us.
Right?
And we
also tend to minimize
conscious learnings because our brain has to do more effort
into practicing something that is not part of our
conscious.
Right? Now, if I give you this particular
thought, right?
If you can write down your one habit,
let us try to figure it out. If you
somehow tend to come up with this response that, okay, I know what one
habit I want to strengthen, right?
And if I ask you what could be that one thought that you
want to replace?
With a new thought that you feel that will work for you.
So it is also identifying what are the maladaptive thought
patterns and trying to reframe it through more adaptive
thoughts.
Then we will go to this worksheet.
So firstly, all of you write down your one habit
that you want to strengthen. Okay, this much only.
Bit by bit, we will move on.
So first, all of you, how many learners? 16 learners, right?
I want to see 16 responses here.
Question is, what is that one habit that you feel you want to strengthen?
Yeah.
Okay, I'm watching your responses, guys.
Can you write down your responses a bit fast?
Okay, I'm giving you one minute. Just write down your response.
Okay.
Only four responses. What about others? Guys, don't write in Q&amp;A.
Please write in the chat section.
Okay, if you are not comfortable writing in the chat section, then you can write in
Q&amp;A. That's fine. I'm reading both.
Okay. Someone's saying their talkative and positive behavior.
Okay.
Is one habit that they want to strengthen up.
You want to strengthen that habit?
Okay, you want to strengthen your talkative behavior.
I'm not able to understand this thing.
Then someone is saying exercise.
You want to strengthen this? Take care.
Atender, collecting more information, applying it for the best,
okay.
Workout, reading, doing exercise daily, studying.
Okay.
That is one habit that you guys want to strengthen. Okay, that's fine.
Then?
Okay, then tell me.
Mindful breaks during work hours. You can take it.
There is a full practice of MBSR, Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction, by Jon Kabat-Zinn.
Right, I can share you the resources.
It is one of the organization that is Pelos
Mindfulness, is also working for this cause,
and they're providing the resources freely, so you can use it.
Of course, you need certain supervision when you start doing practice.
Right?
Okay, what is that one thought you guys want to replace? Tell me.
One thought
that you have overcome over time, you have replaced it, that you
feel that it is maladaptive, that I always think like this.
I want to check the self-awareness levels of our learners here,
that how much they are able to see, what are their limitations, what are my
strengths, what are the things that I can work upon.
So is there anything that you guys feel that, this is my maladaptive thinking, and
I want to improve this thinking? What is that thinking?
What about others?
Divyanke Natender has responded. Okay, all you are writing.
Okay, then I'll wait. Yeah.
Okay. So this core belief that I am not
enough.
Okay. When we understand the thought patterns,
there are three layers of thought patterns.
The very core belief thing is among
the very deepest thought level. Then we have our assumptions and should
statements that we ... Sorry.
Talk to ourselves. And then you have, at the very surface
level, your automatic thoughts. These automatic thoughts are
divided into two parts: positive automatic thoughts and negative automatic
thoughts.
Now, your automatic thoughts that are negative in
nature have more susceptibility to come to your mind
consciously. Okay?
And we tend to be aware of those negative
automatic thoughts, that we need to replace those NATs.
So in short, we call them NATs. So what are
these NATs? Now, one of the learners has written that this
particular thought that, "I am not good enough, I am not
enough." Yes. Many of the people think that they are not
competent enough, they are not good enough.
And it takes a lot of courage to come up and speak
about it, so kudos guys. It's always a
very good exercise to go through catharsis, to
speak your heart, and through this you are also engaging in a collective
bond, in which you are increasing your self-awareness and also
awareness about others.
So this thought pattern that I'm not competent enough.
If we ask, how would
you like to replace this particular thought with?
What should be the new thought that you want to reconstruct it?
Then Atinda Deep is saying, "Less money." Okay.
So what is the thought that you
want to change, Atinda? Less money?
How it's related to that thought?
Ayushi is saying, "Everyone is not your friend." Okay.
"You have some intentions, stop investing energy on them." Okay.
So what is that one thought you want to replace?
You do not want to spend your energy on
people. Is that one thing that you want to replace?
To be success. Okay.
So here we are talking about any one thought that we want to
replace.
Anxiety. Okay.
"I want to feel confident with myself." So
this is the adaptive thought that you want for yourself.
That you want to be very confident in your skin.
That's good.
Now, if you guys have a look on this particular sheet
in which we have written different points.
Fine. So how your brain will be daily reacting to this.
Now, all of you
firstly take snapshot, and then try to respond to it.
I will be asking you,
and then you will be responding to it.
Okay. The very first thing is,
you tend to learn one new habit or
something that is new.
Have you done this? How many of you have done this?
How it has impacted your emotional resilience?
Learning something new. Lately, how many of you have done it?
Try to learn some new language, an instrument, or like this.
Indulge yourself in new hobby.
Okay, so you guys are typing. I will be just waiting for your answers.
Agentic AI approach. Okay. Python.
Okay.
Make videos.
Learned French. Very nice.
Very good.
Okay.
Some of you had mentioned gratitude as one of
the automatic behavior, and now how many of you
practice gratitude?
How
many of you have practiced gratitude
consciously?
Sometimes. Okay.
So everybody's saying learning new skills, tricks in share market,
on investing, and learning how to save money. Very good.
Financial literacy is so damn important.
Very good.
Atinda to God.
Okay, practicing gratitude to God. Very nice.
Okay, now next point. How many of you do physical exercise?
Any physical activity that refreshes you.
Fast. Can you respond faster, guys?
Going to gym, okay. Walking and working, running one morning.
Very nice.
Bhangra dance form. Good.
It's been a long time.
Your cognitive skills also improves with your physical memory.
Right? So whatever physical
activity you do, of course, we
say that, dopamine release and all of that.
Of course, apart from the neurotransmitters and hormones,
your body learn its own ways
to deal with things. So whenever anything goes wrong
in your workplace, in your personal life, your habits save you.
Right? How you channelize yourself, it saves
you. Are you able to take mindful breaks?
Except positive feedback, are you able
to speak confidently?
Can you practice emotional regulation?
Not only this,
also engaging yourself in certain act of kindness
and taking that pause
can be also very
refreshing sometimes, right?
So all of that needs to be taken care of,
right? And pausing before reacting is really fruitful
for you guys.
Right?
Now,
I'm opening it up for Q&amp;A, guys. Any question that you
guys want to ask?
Any questions?
We are coming towards the end of the class, and now I'm inviting questions from
you guys.
Okay, so I'm waiting for your questions. Okay?
No
question, guys?
In the chat section, please.
Okay.
Sources for...
Yes, I'll be sharing the sources. Definitely, I'll be sharing it, okay?
Right. Your topic that is under module three,
majorly sociometry and relationship dynamics will
be covered in the next class.
Right?
Yeah. So I will be focusing on more technical
part in the next class,
all the theories that are related to sociometry also.
Right?
Yeah, we can take a module at a time approach.
Right.
Beforehand, you can focus on certain theories of
self-determination, EI by Daniel Goldman
and all of that, that can help you understand the dynamics of
interpersonal relationships. Right?
The group formation theories that are important.
Okay.
Yes.
Any other questions, guys?
Okay, emotional regulation means.
Emotional regulation means that how you
are able to channelize your emotions, how you are able to
better respond to any situations.
Because see, emotions are that
socio-psychophysiological reactions, right?
That have different dimensions of how you respond to any situation, how you feel
inside, and how you react out. Right?
So to better regulate means how physically we are able to
absorb it, how psychologically we are able to project it, how
we are managing it, how we are reacting, how we are behaving.
All of that comprise of our emotional regulation.
Okay?
Take it.
Okay.
Any other question, guys?
Example means
there are same situation for a number of people.
Your manager is asking for some work by EOD,
and
some people will get anxious, some people will pause.
They know how to react, but some people will create fuss of it that,
"Hey, we have to do so much work. We are doing this, we are
doing that."
So-
That stimulus is neutral for everyone, but how you
react to that particular stimulus makes you
feel how emotionally regulated you are as a person.
Do you take stress in every minor moment in your life, or do you
know how to react to it?
Yes.
Okay.
But I really like your energy, guys.
Throughout the class, you guys are very prompt.
And in the upcoming classes, we will focus more about module three content
and theories and definitions. I want all of you to go
through the e-content now, so you know if there is any
doubt in the next class that you can ask it. Okay?
Yes. Now give me a thumbs up if we can end the class, guys, if there are
no more questions.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Thank
you.
Thank you, everyone. Have a good day, all of you.
Everyone have a good day, okay?
Yeah.
