Live Class 2 — Cognitive Analytics and Social Skills for Professional (BS605)
Topic: Attitudes, Emotions & Inner Power
Date & Time: 13th August 2026 | 12:00-12:50
Source: https://amigo.amityonline.com/mod/page/view.php?id=376181
Captions: English (auto-generated) from Vimeo

--- Transcript ---

Okay, so this course is for cognitive analytics and social skills.
Right? How many of you have started going through the content?
Be very honest.
Good afternoon, Tanu. Have you guys started
going the content and sessions, the recording content?
Okay, so you've completed module one.
In this session, we would be focusing upon
module one and module two, basically.
And of course, life classes
gives you that medium where you connect with the faculty, you
ask them doubts, and your faculty are there to
help you out with the discussion and all.
So whenever you guys feel that you have certain doubt that you want
to ask, you can always write in the chat section.
You can speak,
if it's feasible and you know that you are not disrupting the flow of the
class. Of course, you have the facility to
ask in the Ask to Professor to your faculty.
So I motivate you all to start going through the content,
start reading the content, start reading your SLM,
start reading your
quiz. Quizzes attempt is very important, so do
that also. If you face any challenge, just let me know.
Right?
Okay, I couldn't go through module one due to work.
Definitely, yes. I will be taking classes.
I will be taking the basics also. I'll be discussing the theory part also,
right?
Yes. And as we have started late, if it's
feasible for you, we can extend also. That's totally fine.
Right?
Yeah.
Okay.
So the topics that you are going to cover here,
understanding the self preliminaries.
Then you also tend to--
Is there any topic that you face any problem with before I start
with my PPT and all?
You can tell me so that I can focus more on that.
Models of T is also there. Models of self-understanding,
Johari window.
Then we have self-PE scale, importance of self-esteem, efficacy,
self-respect, behavior communication,
assertive skills in technology adoption is there,
visualization, problem sensitivity,
problem solving.
So all of this is in your module one.
Yes.
Right, and in your module two,
it is majorly focusing
on the attitude part.
So what you guys want, like to focus more on the module two or
module one also?
Your module two topics are more important.
It has emotional intelligence and competence.
Yeah, I have not shared the screen yet.
Since we have started with the course, this is always
a rapport formation exercise that we do before starting.
We get to know what the learners want, what are the topics that
they have still covered, and tell you what
is more important, what is the weightage of the topics.
Right?
Yes, emotional intelligence is
something that is more important for you rather than interpersonal intelligence.
ICP type A model, all okay. So
towards the end of the class, you write down the topics that you want in the next
session, and I can add that also.
Right? Yeah, so just give me one minute, and I'll be starting.
Yeah, so I hope I'm able to share the screen with you guys.
Yes.
Okay, Asitosh, I want to join the group.
Okay, I will take all these doubts towards the end of the session.
Right?
Give me a thumbs up if we can start with the session, guys.
I want your active participation throughout the session. Right?
Yes. Thank you. Thank you, Neeraj, for confirming this.
Yeah. So,
in this course, that is cognitive analysis and
professional skills,
we are focusing on something that is
multidisciplinary for you.
We are not just focusing on the social elements, we are not just
focusing on the elements
that are part of psychology or workplace behavior, but
this is some subject that gives you knowledge of
interdisciplinary things. We have cognitive analytics and social
cognition. Right?
Before discussing the theories and models, we want you to also understand
about everyday life apart from the professional life we had.
Because every day we make certain decision and
that are how to respond to certain criticism.
Whose idea do you accept? Whose
idea do you reject? What is the way you think?
Is there certain situations in which we think completely different?
What are the decision-making models?
How do we understand people's perception, right?
Nikhil is saying my screen is black. Is this the same for everyone?
I hope my PPT is visible for you. Everyone, just confirm me
quickly, please.
Yes, visible. Okay, thank you. Nikhil, please check from your
side once.
Please check from your side once, okay?
Right. Please check from your side and
let us not break the flow of the class.
Okay.
See, when we talk about cognitive
analytics, we do want to understand the
cognition part.
I will just give a brief
summary or outline of what cognition is all about.
When we talk about cognition, we talk about the mental processes,
thoughts, thinking, attention, perception,
memory, how do we interpret things around us?
What are the sensory experiences and all of that. Right?
And then when we talk about higher order thinking, of course,
decision-making becomes a very important part. Right?
Then comes the performance part, where we talk about the
excellence. Right? So social cognition means how
in society, how in social situations, we
tend to behave, we tend to think, we tend to follow,
and how do we interact with people,
right?
This is clear?
This much is clear, guys?
Wait, let me...
Yes, okay. Thank you, Sakshi Tano, for confirming the same.
Okay.
Now, there are little
questions that we think every day.
It can be why do people behave in a
certain way in my team, in my organization, why
I responded to that. Because we do have limited information
of ourselves and in people around us, their values, their
information and everything. Right?
But all of that is derived out of our values, out of our
assumptions, out of our biases, stereotypes
and all of that. That generally, we
do not think of, but this subject will give you that
elevation where you can think beyond these lines.
Right?
So what is the application of this course in your academic
life, in your professional life, in your relationship and your personal
development? Fine. And all the topics that we will be
discussing throughout the classes, throughout the session, it will
really elevate all of these four dimensions.
Okay?
Yes.
Right. I really love the energy that you guys are bringing and being very prompt
in your responses. Thank you so much.
So
if we understand
very basic things about human
behavior, right? Human behavior, what
is that universal thing that
tend to decide our behavior, that tend
to change our behavior?
And not only that, but it also somehow guide our
behavior. What can we say?
Values? Yes or not?
Emotions. Good. Anshu has said emotions.
Definitely emotions is one of the part.
Then?
Apart from your universal emotions, we do have universal values.
Feelings
Yes.
Skills and expertise are also there.
Today, we are focusing more on the intrapersonal
thing. Something that is interpersonal.
When you talk about interpersonal, then of course you will be focusing
on the skills and competence and attitude part.
When we talk about ourselves, we talk about understanding ourselves, and
so interpersonal elements would be there.
Yeah. So,
a sense of self-awareness. When we
talk about beliefs, emotions, and behavior.
Of course, that cognitive framework,
that framework in which you are trying to
amalgamate everything, whether your beliefs, your emotions, your behaviors.
So, a very fantastic theory in this domain is given by
Schwartz. And
the human value theory not only tell you about what are the inherent
values, but also how your emotions, how your behavior, and most
important, your cognition. A cognition we also call beliefs.
So how all of this interact.
And the intersection will tell you what are the
things that you need to take care, and you need to be
very aware of. And I also request all of you
to please take a snapshot, because as we progress in our
classes,
as we come towards examinations, it's very important for us to have
the technical pointers ahead, apart from the concepts that we
discussed.
So, if we talk about personal values,
in our behavior, how we think, how we behave,
how do we feel things, your internal values.
Now, what are internal values? Internal values are the hot
cognitions, are the core cognition or core beliefs that we have.
So understand it in this way: that you
have
core beliefs.
But
I'm not able to
change it. Wait.
Okay, let me
include that in my upcoming PPT, in my upcoming slide.
Let me give you a brief of the
theory first.
So, our cognitions have three layer.
Be attentive in this part, that's really important.
So our cognition have three layer.
What are the three layers? We start from
understanding first layer of our cognition.
That is your core beliefs.
Core beliefs form the very important and very basic
part. Then comes the second layer
of our belief, and the second layer is our
assumptions or the should statements that
we tell to ourselves. This is how we should respond,
this is how we should behave in any setting, in any environment, or with
some people.
The third layer is the
automatic thought pattern. The automatic cognitions or the
automatic thought pattern.
So,
the values that are generated out of us,
our behavior, are the core beliefs, the
core cognition values, and these core cognition
values give rise to the core values.
So core beliefs are related to core values. Understood?
This much is understood? Yes?
Understood the model of three layers of our cognition?
Okay.
Great.
Fine.
So whatever happen with us, how do you behave in your
personal life, in your workplace, so 35% to
45% of that will be determined by
your core values.
Now, let us have a look on certain researches.
If you talk about these researches,
these are the 2024 researches and
'23, and one of a seminal paper that is Google
Aristotle project, I have included, but I recommend all of
you to also go through the latest researches that
tells you
how one's behavior, values, and ethics, and of
course it is related to one's emotions,
and how they behave in any
organizations. So, meanwhile, when
we would be progressing in the sessions and we would be
understanding different topics, especially your fourth and fifth module, you will
get to know that
most important part of your course is to understand
human behavior. Whether in terms of your personal life or
professional life.
So from day one, if you start reading the latest research
papers-
If you
start
going through Google Scholar and you are reading what are
the latest articles in terms of workplace cognition, in
terms of employee behavior and performance, it will give you a
different edge. Because in your examinations, you have three
sections. In the first section, you tend to solve the short
answers, but in section B, it is dedicated for case study.
So case study, I always see learners too writing down
definitions and parts, but it requires more of
analytical answers. And for that, you need to be really very
thorough with your application part.
What good you are reading these days, what is the current thing you can add, and
what are your opinions. So your opinion will be formed when you study
more current things.
Right?
Okay.
So this you will do. You will go and learn
some latest trends and research papers that are going
there.
Great.
These are another researches.
Just take the snapshot of this, because if you go to Google
Scholar and you write down the citation, you write down
this major life decision and personal values
by AP in 2023, it will give you exact research paper.
So it is for that reference I have pasted here, that you
can study in your own pace.
Yes.
Right?
Just give me a thumbs up if you have taken the screenshot, we can move forward.
Okay. Now,
if we talk about
awareness, the very first thing we need to have
is self-awareness. In module two, you are
having emotional intelligence as one of the important topic
after attitudes. And of course, in subsequent
class, we will be going through all the content.
But self-awareness is one of the very important feature in each
sub-module in the second module. So this is very important
topic for you guys. Now, self-awareness gives
rise to moral awareness.
So you all might have
somewhere
heard about something as
id, ego, and superego. Yes?
The concept of id, ego, and superego, like we do have
some impulses in our lives, and
that impulse really make us to do things for our
pleasure, for our immediate pleasure.
So that moral compass arises from
childhood only where our super conscious, superego, and ego comes
to picture, and it try to control the id
part of our personality. Fine. And because of that,
you tend to develop more moral awareness among
yourself apart from self-awareness.
So are we able to recognize our
situations
whenever we need to make that ethical decision?
And it's not about just ethical decision, but
sometimes we do see that we are in a cognitive dissonance
phase. Now, what is cognitive dissonance?
Cognitive
dissonance, right?
So what is this cognitive dissonance?
In cognitive dissonance,
you are in that situation
where you have alternate options and beliefs to
choose from and think. And you are not
able to come to a certain
decision.
Right?
And because we are not able to make any certain decision, there is always a
dissonance. So you think, "Whether should I go for option
A, or whether should I think about option B?" So in any dilemma
situation where our
cognition is in question, is cognitive dissonance.
Right?
Now, ethical fading also refers to certain
behavior which
trigger these kind of cognitive dissonance among us,
and here where our emotional intelligence, our moral awareness,
our self-awareness, our attitudes, and all of that that you will be learning in the
course will come into picture. So today, I just want to make you aware
what this course is about, what it looks like, and
what kind of implication and impact it can have on
your lives.
Wait,
I will just change my screen.
Okay.
Yeah. Another part of it is
also
moral judgment. So if you are aware, you
have more judgment of what will be right
and wrong for you.
But judgment comes before intention.
So when you are studying the topics, in Section A, when
you have MCQs, you tend to confuse, because
those are very technical questions that we put up there.
And you require instantaneous recall of your memory.
So try to form synopsis notes of whatever we discuss in class,
like what is the first step, what is the next step.
So it starts from awareness, then it goes to judgment, then comes the
intention part, and then of course is the action part, right?
So you
learn how we can prioritize certain actions,
certain things over others, and then we also talk about the moral
action that we can have with us.
Right?
Yes.
Upon what you have written,
can you elaborate it?
Yeah.
Okay.
Now I have a question for all of you.
Right.
If I ask you all,
how
do you communicate your needs
in workplace?
How do you communicate your needs in workplace?
What do you think is the idea of
cognitive flexibility,
right, creativity, innovation? And do you feel,
if you guys are working, do you feel that you have that
flexibility enough to think and behave and to
communicate your needs? And
if there's something, in your opinion, that you guys do to work
upon it, right? So I give you one minute to think about it and
write down in the chat section. Yeah.
Okay, I'm waiting for your answers, guys.
Please write in the chat section, don't write in Q&amp;A.
How do you communicate your needs in your workplace?
What is the idea of creativity and innovation?
Do you think it is getting fulfilled?
Or in your personal life also. Those who are not working, they can write in the
reference of their personal life also.
Just two minutes, guys. Just two minutes, and I'm waiting for all your responses,
right?
Meanwhile, let me discuss one more model with you.
I'll be sharing another screen. Wait.
Yes, so keep on writing your responses till the time I'm sharing different case.
We have 40 learners, only one person to respond
now. At least I want 10 responses from you.
Fast. This is a brainstorm session, and this is not something that
we are testing your knowledge. This is a very generic
discussion, right? So please increase, improve
upon your speed.
You can write down short pointer, what you feel.
Okay.
So currently I can see Nupur and Mr.
Suresh has typed. Can I have
more four answers, please?
Yeah.
I'm just
sharing another
model with you, right?
Okay.
Just let me know if you are able to see
this. Wait.
Okay. So you're able to see this
12th slide, right?
Okay. So let me see how many of you have responded.
Organization culture accept and deny our demands. Okay.
Okay,
so meeting with a specific authority, just need to talk out with a
person. Okay. Right. So it's working for
you. So you guys are having that kind of awareness that you know
what's working for us and what not.
The whole idea of this reflection exercise to build that sense of
self-awareness, of course, among you.
Right.
Here you can see
that,
after understanding values, we also tend to understand the
idea of self.
Right?
So we talked about
self-concept. We talked about first after understanding the moral
intention, judgment, and action part.
We talk about what is the architecture of self to which we have to
become aware of. Fine. So it really starts
from that idea of concept that we have.
Now, see, there is something as self-esteem and
self-worth,
self-efficacy, self-respect. So you need to have a good clarity
of what is the difference between all of these concepts.
When we say self-concept, it is
my beliefs, my cognition,
my reality about
myself.
When we say self-worth or self-esteem, then you first
understand that there is some concept called as global worth.
Now, what is that global worth? People around
us also tend to perceive us, what they
feel about us, what they think about us, and all of that.
And that judgment gives rise to definition of our
self-worth. Right? So there would be something as global
worth, and with respect to that global worth, how do I
evaluate myself becomes a part of my self-worth. Clear?
This distinction is clear, yes or no?
This is understood, right?
Anyone having any doubt?
Yes.
Self-concept means how we see ourselves as a person.
Yes, self-concept only talks about our thinking to
ourselves.
Right. And when we do include how people think about us,
that determine my self-worth. So if I say in this class,
one of the learners said, "I do
not explain very well, your explanation is not good." Okay.
Then my self-esteem would be low because I'm feeling bad
about it, that one learner has told that, "Ma'am is not explaining really good."
Right.
So that way, your self-esteem has two part, like your self-worth, that
is positive or negative, but that depends how the other people are
evaluating me. But if I say, "I think that I
am a good faculty, I can explain really well," that means I'm having a good
self-concept. Right. Then
if your manager says that, "You really need
to work upon your skills in
terms of people behavior and how
you communicate with people."
Then if you think bad about it, it will be negative self-esteem.
If you feel good about it, of course, we can feel good about it.
It is a constructive feedback, we need to work upon that.
Then my self-esteem is high, but it is dependent on the global
worth that is being created around me, Right?
Yes.
Then we talk about
self-efficacy. Now, self-efficacy is
something that is determined only with a task.
It can be determined to a particular task.
If I feel that I'm able to perform this particular task, it means my
self-efficacy is higher.
Right?
If I think I'm not able to achieve this particular goal, it is
from project to project, it is from event to event, it
is from task-based. Right. Then what is
self-respect? Self-respect emerges from self-concept.
Right? My self-respect means
I am allowing myself how my global
worth will be treated. It will be a part of my self-respect.
Right? I know myself, I'm self-awareness, and I
can decide how it needs to be treated, means my self-esteem
is also high along with my self-respect.
Fine. So I think these definitions are clear, guys.
Give me a thumbs up if we can move ahead from here.
Okay. Thank you so much, Sakshi, for confirming the same.
Okay. Now, you know about Johari
window, right? I would be taking all the concepts
in detail, of course, in upcoming classes.
But in today class, I wanted to give you some gist of topics
that make you look to the e-content, that make you
look to the LMS and your course, and
explore everything so that on the next class onwards we can speed up and
discuss in depth and have those models discussed.
And then, of course, you would be having certain queries.
So if we understood the concept of self-
That is intrapersonal. Now you also tend to understand the
interpersonal awareness. Fine.
Now in interpersonal, we say there are different models.
There is T model, there is Johari model.
We talk about different quadrants.
You can see there are four areas to which you can
think about yourself. We say that a
very basic area,
one area that people also know about us, we also know,
is that area which is open. That means I
know these things about myself, people around me also know this
thing about myself. It becomes part of that quadrant that is
open. So the very first quadrant
defines that.
Then we see that there is something as
hidden quadrant. Hidden. Now what is that hidden
part that also called as a facet?
This hidden part means I know this
about myself, it can be any of my behavior,
about certain attitude or beliefs, any emotions or feelings or
any particular set of attitudes,
but other people are not aware.
It is unknown to other people, so we call it that,
okay, then this part of my personality
comes under this quadrant is hidden.
This is understood, right?
Then we call something as our blind spots.
Now what are those blind spots?
Things that are known to me
or unknown.
Things that are unknown to me, but other people
know it for me, that are my blind spots in
personality.
Then, of course, there would be certain things that are unknown to me, that are
unknown to another, and those comes under unknown
areas.
Now I have this question for all of you to ask.
Tell me one trait of your open area.
Tell me one trait of blind spot.
Blind spot you cannot tell, but after feedback you would know.
As a in past that some people would have told you that you
don't know this about yourself, and this is one of your trait.
It can be positive, it can be negative. So tell me that in blind spot.
Tell me one trait of your hidden thing that you think
that you have, but right now other peoples have not
explored it.
So for these three quadrant, tell me one trait of
yours first.
I'm waiting for your responses, guys.
Take one minute and then respond. It's totally fine.
Okay, so Suraj has written. Now I want major
answers, guys.
I want at least 10 responses. Please be quick.
For three quadrants, one traits each.
Open, hidden, and
blind spot that you guys feel.
That someone has given you that feedback.
So we have Amit, Anisha, Anil, Anshu, Mamta, Manik,
Ayushi, Sakshi, Samarth, Tanu, Yukta.
Gaurav, Dinesh.
Even if it's not feasible for you to write all the three quadrants, can I have at
least one response for one quadrant that you guys are aware of?
Please be quick.
Okay, another 30 seconds, and then we will discuss.
Punctual is the open area. Hidden is personal financial
status.
Blind, management believes in my feedback. Okay.
I'm very weak to speak in English.
Okay.
Open, my behavior. Most about me is hidden. Okay.
Unknown.
I'm soft-spoken and kind with words.
I am a little under confidence. I too much care about people.
Okay. Okay, so this was to-- See, this is greatly,
Anil, thank you so much for sharing. You have greatly put all the pointers.
Yeah.
So, it's much important for us to
take feedback from people.
To get feedback from people, because that way you really
improve upon your blind spots. And it's really
important for us to be
productive upon our feedbacks. This is how we also
grow.
Right?
Now if particularly we talk about
the psychological empowerment that we get,
is of course, empowerment comes with the
excellence part, right? Your course not only deals with the
analytics,
but also the skills for your excellence.
And that skills are, of course, related to your empowerment, whether it in social
model, psychological model, behavior model, right?
So how do you actually align your values, right?
We talked about values, and we will again continue discussing the
values. It's just, how do we understand
that we have to align our goals, our personal
beliefs and values.
It's not just about the skills, but also competence, right?
And when we talk about competence, we have all the components of skills, of
knowledge, of attitudes. Right.
So your cognitions, your beliefs invoke
effectiveness, how you are going to master.
It's definitely one of the dimension of psychological empowerment.
Your self-determination, your perseverance,
how do you feel that I have that autonomy with me,
and that is also called my locus of control,
right? Locus of controls mean whenever I feel
that cause of this particular things is derived out of
me, that means my locus of control is internal.
If I say that, "No, this thing happened because of this person or that person,"
that means my locus of control is outward or external.
Right?
Now, what do you think, guys, that
in which
situation we should be having locus of control internal,
and then in certain situations, we have locus of control external?
So do you feel that a person can switch between the locus of control or they,
over time, they are aligned towards a single locus of control?
What's your idea on this?
Yeah. Maybe I can simplify the question as such,
that, okay, first you tell me what's your locus of control.
In one word, internal or external?
Akshay has written internal. Okay, that means that most
of the things that happen to you,
the cause can be relative to you. This is what you feel.
Analyzing control over emotions. Yes, definitely.
See, emotional intelligence too we would be anyway covering.
Just wanted to know that you understood the concept of locus of
control, because that means that how do you view your
world, right? And of course, with time, it becomes the
part of how we think, how we behave, even in our personal life or our
workplace.
Yes, internal to address the external. Oh, that's really good.
That this is really a good line that you have written.
Right. Now, when we say we want to control over the emotions,
it's not really very practical thing because our brain
really work on an automatic mode.
Internal locus. Okay.
Feeling and thought. Yes, definitely, cognition is internal.
So,
the
part that follows our beliefs, our cognitions, our emotions
and feelings are our
internal behavior. We also call them covert
behavior, right? C-O-V-E-R-T, covert behavior.
And whatever we behave, whatever body language we have.
So anything that we can see is overt,
that is observable, right?
So
the self-determination part tells you that you should be having
autonomy of your decision. You should be having that
independence and control, that locus within you, right?
And then the empowerment also features the impact part.
And in impact part, we see that whether it has
actually influenced the situations and outcomes
or not. Fine. So if we look to the experience
factor here, PE, the psychological empowerment
can be written mathematically as that particular factor
that has also
showed a directive positive relation between age,
experience, and dimensions. Fine.
Okay.
External is friends and environment, definitely.
Yeah.
Okay, guys. So it was wonderful
interacting with you all.
Right. I just want you to take certain snapshots.
Yeah.
Eight.
This one. Please take the snapshot of this slide.
Done? Okay.
As we progress in our lectures, we would be having the discussions in detail.
There would be theories, there would be terms.
So I recommend all of you to start going through the content.
It will really help you all. Right?
These are another researcher's, take snapshot, guys.
You can read it at your own pace later.
Done?
Okay.
"Ma'am, I want to join the WhatsApp group."
See,
the medium through which you communicate to the faculty, you have your
LMS, right? You have LMS, you have mailing
facility, you have "Ask Your Professor." So we all motivate
you to communicate with the faculty over there.
Whenever you have anything that you want to discuss, you have any doubt related to
your course of course, you can always
ask them in live classes and you ask your professor and through mails.
And apart from that, whenever you feel like you have certain technical
difficulty in accessing the same, your course, assignment, submission,
anything, you always have dedicated support team,
right? So write down to support team whenever you feel you need help in
any technical
thing that you want, be prompt. Right?
And of course, you guys have your own communities, you have your own
channels, right? So you can see that, but
officially, I can't advocate the same, right? Yeah.
Okay. Nupur, "I have a question. When I meet someone, they always talk about
themselves and then who end up being the listener advisor?" Yeah.
So you say that when you meet someone,
I am the one who ends up being the listener, okay, and
advisor. But that's not a problem. Right?
You are the one who's being the listener also, and you are the one who is being the
advisor also.
Then it's not a problem, right? You are playing both the parts.
Right?
Okay. So guys, it was lovely interacting with you all.
I'm really excited for our next session.
And please start going through the content because in the next class, we'll be
discussing models and examples and of course, cases. Right?
It would really help. Thank you so much, and happy learning.
