CSE601 — Live Class 2 Transcript
Subject: Data Structures and Algorithm Design (CSE601) — Semester II
Topic: Trees and Graphs
Date & Time: 20-Sep-26 & 09:00-09:50
AMIGO: https://amigo.amityonline.com/mod/page/view.php?id=377964
Vimeo: https://player.vimeo.com/video/1228567370?h=82a9374a29
Duration: ~57 min (3398s)
Source: Vimeo auto-generated English captions
So I can see the folks are joining. A very good morning, class.
And give me a twin check if you guys can hear me loud and clear.
All right. Yes, sir, you are clear. Okay, great.
Let me just bring up my screen.
So in today's session, we're going to cover a very interesting concept, that is
trees and graphs. So I hope that most of you must be familiar with these
terminology, like trees, what are trees, what are graphs.
Okay, you might have studied all these things in
your class 11 to 12 as well, okay, in some sort of mathematics.
Okay, but we will cover it, how the trees data structure.
So remember in the first class we discussed
what do you mean by data structure,
and what are the different type of data structure.
So we discussed that there are two types, primitive and non-primitive.
And then we also discussed that there are further classifications of the data
structures like the linear data structures and non-linear data structure.
So linear data structure are those data structure where they are organizing the
data in a linear way, or you can say in a sequential manner.
But the non-linear data structure are those data structure which are organizing the
data in the form of a hierarchy, or you can say in the form of a tree.
So both trees and graphs will come under the non-linear data structure. Okay?
And the major advantage of the non-linear data structure, can any one of you tell
me what is the major advantage of using the non-linear data structure?
Any idea?
Amit, Ajima,
Shefta, any idea why we use the non-linear data structure? Any major advantage?
The only advantage we have is it helps in searching the data faster.
The faster searching is always there in
the non-linear. And same if you go with the linear part, it will take some time.
So from the searching perspective, always prefer the non-linear data structures.
With that, let me start our today's lecture.
So we will start the basic definition of tree. What do you mean by tree?
Any idea? What is tree?
We have already discussed tree are the non-linear data structure.
Okay, and then each tree consists of nodes and edges.
I hope everyone knows. Okay, everyone has seen the tree.
So trees are the
basic data structure, which are used to represent the hierarchical relationship.
Okay, so every tree represent,
if you look at every tree, you will find out the nodes.
Okay? The nodes and everything. So here you can see the nodes and edges.
So each individual. This is called, can someone tell me, what is the name of this
node?
This is called root node. Why? Because this is the starting.
Okay, Ashima, you can write down into the chat. Okay.
I have the chat window open, so you can write down into the chat.
Okay, so the first node will be called as the root node.
Okay, now the bottom node,
any idea what are these nodes called?
These nodes are called leaf node. Correct, Amit.
These nodes will be called as leaf node, and the rest, everything will be called as
nodes. The intermediate nodes. Okay, similarly,
this is called the parent. Okay, this is called the children node.
So I hope this is clear. Okay. Again, this is a parent, these are the children.
This is a parent,
these are the childrens we have. So this is how the trees are represented
with nodes and edges.
Moving on to the next.
So there are some applications of tree we have.
Okay, so, you might have seen if you're working in an organizations.
Okay, so usually we use trees to represent the organization chart, just
like the CSO will be on the top, and then,
the director, assistant director, VP, and everything will be at the bottom.
And then under the VP and everything, there will be a certain different hierarchy.
So again, if you have to represent the organization chart where you have to set up
the relationship, you will use trees. Similarly, the expression trees.
Okay, when we were solving the stacks and queues, we always use the expression
trees.
Okay, so these are some basic applications where the tree data section is used.
Now, coming to the terminology of the tree.
Okay,
so here you can see, as I mentioned, the first node will be called as the root of
the tree.
The last node will be called as the leave of the tree.
This will be called the parent of V, and V will be called as the child of the U.
Okay?
In every tree, there will be exactly one node, which will be called as the root.
Okay, so you can't have more than one root in a tree. Okay, always remember.
And then any node which is not having any children will be called as leaves.
Okay, so again, this can't be a leaf. Why? Because this node have children.
But again, if you look at this node,
these nodes will be called as leaves. Why?
Because they don't have any children as such.
Okay, now moving on to the next.
I hope you guys are clear with the concept of internal nodes and leaves.
Okay, any node between root node and leaf node will be called as the internal
nodes. Okay, and then,
we have already discussed, these are called as leaves.
Okay,
are you clear with the concept of siblings?
Sibling you all know, right? If both nodes have the same children.
Sorry, same parent. So here you can see the V and W.
V and W are having the same parent, U. So in that case, V and W will be sibling.
Okay, so we also have the concept of ancestor and descendant.
Amrita, is a root node is an internal node? No.
A root node can't be an internal node.
Okay, root will be the first node. Internal means anything between root and
leaves will be called as internal node.
Okay, now coming to the ancestor and descendant.
So ancestor means, for example, the parent node.
So whatever node that comes first will be called as ancestor.
So U and V are the ancestor of X.
U and V. Why? Because they come before X.
So that is why we are saying U and V are the ancestor of X.
Similarly, V and X are the descendant of U. Why?
Because both V and X came after U.
So is it clear, the concept of ancestor and descendant?
Ancestor means whoever comes first, descendant means whoever comes after that.
Clear?
All right.
Moving on to the fourth terminology.
So tree and subtree, I hope you guys are clear with the concept of subtree.
Any tree which is derived from the main tree will be called as subtree
Okay. So if you look here, we have this complete tree.
Okay, this is the entire tree we have.
Now, what we did, we just took out the specific tree.
Okay, so this will be called as the subtree.
Again, a subtree will also consist of the root node, the children node,
or you can say the leaf node.
Is that clear to everyone, the concept of?
Alright.
Now, there's always a question in the exam that how you can find out the height of
the tree. Okay, so can any one of you tell me how to calculate the height?
How to calculate the height of the tree?
Okay, so let me give you a very basic example.
So what you have to do is whenever you have to find out the level and the height,
okay, so what you can do is
just count the number of edges from root to
leaf.
Okay, so we already know this is the root node and these are the leaf
node. Now, if I have to traverse from root to leaf, how many edges I have
to traverse?
Just count. Again, this will be a leaf node. This can also be a leaf node.
But what is the maximum number of edges I have to traverse?
One,
two, and three.
So always the height will be three.
Clear?
And same with the level.
We always start with the level zero.
Level zero,
level one, level two, and level three.
Okay, so now if I have to traverse till N, then one, two, and three.
Okay? This will be the height.
Okay, let me give you an example so that you can understand it better.
Binary tree. Binary tree, you are clear?
Any tree where every node has at most two children.
Okay, binary means two. So if every node has at most two children, it will be
called as the binary tree. So there will be a left child, there will be a right
child.
So can we say that WZ is a binary tree?
No.
Why? Because a W only has one children,
so it can't be a binary tree. Can we say U is a binary tree,
UXY? Yes. Why? Because it is having
two childrens. That is why it is called as the binary tree.
Now, what is full binary tree? A full binary tree is that tree where every node
has two children, except the leaf node.
Okay, so here you can see every node has two.
Only the leaf
nodes are those node where we don't have any children.
So that will be called as the full binary tree.
All right.
Now, property of-- Again, from the exam standpoint, this is good.
This is
a very good question. So, in the exam, what I expected that you will be given a
tree and then they will ask you, okay, that how to calculate the total number of
nodes, how many leaf nodes, and how many internal nodes.
Okay, so this is the formula.
Okay, so you guys can take a screenshot, or you can note it somewhere.
Okay, this is the formula through which how you can calculate the total number of
nodes, where H is the...
What is H? H is the height of the tree.
Now, let's take an example of this tree.
Suppose we have this tree. Can any one of you tell me what is the height here?
What is the value of H here?
Okay, Ashima's saying three. Amitabh's saying two.
What else?
Any other number?
Understand the concept which I told you
two slides before.
You have to traverse the edges,
edges from root to leaf.
Okay, so this is the root. This is the leaf.
If I have to go from root to leaf, how many edges I have to traverse?
One,
two.
Is that clear
why the height is two?
Yes, no, maybe?
Okay. So in that case, the height of this tree will be two.
Now, apply the formula here. If I have to find out what are the total number of
nodes we have. So if I put H is equal to two here, so
two to the power of two plus one, that is three.
Two to the power of three is eight. Eight minus one, seven.
Just calculate how many. So there will be seven number of nodes, one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven. Yes.
Same, leaf node. We know the value of H is two.
Two to the power of two, that is four. One, two, three, four.
There will be four nodes. Now, coming to the internal nodes, we know the value of H
is two. Two to the power of two, that is four minus one, three.
There will be three internal nodes.
Now, can anyone of you tell me, what are the internal nodes we have?
This one,
and
I think there is something wrong here. There's only two nodes.
Yeah. Only two internal nodes we have.
So we have two internal nodes, four leaf node, and seven number of total nodes.
Okay?
Internal nodes are those nodes
where they have at least one children.
Okay, so that is why we are not considering these are the internal nodes.
So this node has one children, this node has at least one children.
And again, this is the root node.
Again, a specific algorithm that whenever you have the binary tree of height H,
the number of nodes will always be less than two to the power H minus one.
Okay, so you just have to remember the formula.
You cannot have more nodes than a full binary tree of height H.
Okay.
Again, the minimum height of the binary tree, again, you can write down the
formula. The minimum height of the binary tree, which is having N nodes, is log N
plus one.
Okay, nobody's asking you that, okay, derive this formula.
Nobody will ask you, but it can be an MCQ question.
That's how you can calculate the minimum height of any binary tree.
Okay, binary tree ADT is not in your syllabus, so we are skipping that.
Okay. Again, this is how the binary tree gets represented in the form of an array.
So, let me show you how it is done. Suppose you have this binary tree.
Okay, you will create a table. You will start with a root node, and then you will
keep on moving. So first, left child will be one, right child will be two,
and then you have to keep on the sequence.
Now, again, you came back to the left child.
Again, for the left child, we have the
A is the left child of B, so you will mark it as three.
Again, right child is C, we will mark it as four.
Now, we will move to the F, because B is already done. Now we will move to the F.
In the F, we have the left child, that is five, but we don't have any right child.
So whenever you would not have any right child, you will mark it as minus one.
Okay. Now, coming to the node A. Again, we don't have any left children or right
children, so we will mark it as minus one, minus one.
So this is how the binary tree gets represented in the form of array.
Okay, this is our ADT representation.
Amitha, you want me to repeat that, this array-based representation?
Okay.
So, yeah. Just look at this tree here. So we have this binary tree.
Okay, just create a table here. Okay, starting with node, whatever nodes we have.
Okay, start with a root node.
Okay, so root will always be zero. Okay, we will always assign the value of root as
zero. Now take the first node. Okay, there will be two column, left child and right
child. Do we have the left child of D? Yes, no?
Then mark it as one. Okay, always follow the sequence.
Then, do we have the right child of D? Yes.
Then
increment the value. Yes. Now, again, take the left subtree.
Start coming to the node B. In the B, we also have the left child.
Increment the sequence. Three. Then, do we have the right child of B? Yes.
Increment the value. Four. Now, left subtree is done. Move on to the right subtree.
Coming to the node F, do we have the left child? Yes.
Then increment the value, five. Now, in the F, do we have the right child of
F?
No. So whenever you don't have any child, you will mark it as minus one.
Okay. Now, coming to the A.
In A, we neither have the left nor we have the right child.
So in that case, both will be minus one, minus one.
Yeah, Amit, so root will always start from zero,
and then you have to increment the value.
Okay, so this is how the array-based representation of tree works.
When someone asked that, can you represent a tree in the form of array?
Yes, this is how that tree get represented.
Okay. Again, this is also a reference-based representation, but
nothing important from the exam standpoint.
Now, moving on to another thing, that's another important topic, that is the tree
traversal. I hope you already know the meaning of traversal.
You already know the meaning of traversal?
Tree traversal means that you are moving from one node to another node.
Okay. So for example, we will start with the root node, and then we will cover each
and every node. So similarly, in the binary tree also, we have this
traversal technique. Okay, so we have this, the preorder, inorder,
and postorder. I hope you all have heard about these terminology, preorder
traversal, inorder traversal, postorder traversal.
Okay? So again, these are the traversal technique we have. Now, let me show you.
So, preorder means
you will visit
the left child.
Okay, then
can any one of you tell me what we do in the
preorder?
Pre means before.
So first
node, then left, and then right.
Okay. N, L, and R. Okay, let me write it down somewhere.
Okay, so if I have to find out the preorder, so first we will traverse the node,
then we will do the left child, then we will do the right child.
Now, if I have to do the inorder traversal, then first we will do the left child,
then node,
and then the right child.
Similarly, if I have to do the postorder traversal, then first left,
then right,
and then N, the root node.
Is that clear to everyone? The preorder, inorder, and postorder.
The level order is not in your syllabus.
Okay, so NLR, LNR, or LRN.
Okay, and now we will see some example.
Okay.
Let's take an example of this tree.
So if I go with the preorder, so in the preorder, what will we do?
Okay, Amitha, you are asking why we are doing the preorder, inorder, and postorder.
The reason is, these are the traversal technique.
Okay, why we are doing the traversal?
The question is why we are doing the traversal.
The reason is, if you have to solve any mathematical expression like this.
Okay. Now, if you don't know how to find out the formula, how will you be able
to find out the solution of this problem
if you don't do the traversal?
Okay. So obviously, if you have the mathematical formula, always go with the
inorder, because the solution can only be obtained by using the inorder.
But if someone asks you that, okay, can you give me the solution of this tree based
on the preorder traversal, then you have to follow the sequence.
Okay. So let's take an example of the preorder.
Can any one of you tell me what will be the preorder traversal here of this tree?
Let's give a try. What will be the first order? What will be the first node?
A, B, D, C? Mm-hmm.
The first, again, as I mentioned, we will start with the root node,
and then the left part, and then the right part.
So first we will go with the A, then we will go to the B because B is coming to the
left, then D,
and then in the last, we have the C. So this is how the preorder traversal works.
Now,
suppose we have this tree.
Okay. We have this tree. You guys can take a screenshot.
We have this tree, and now we have to traverse in preorder, postorder, and
inorder.
Now, let's start with the preorder. So first will be A. What will be the next node?
Okay.
Correct. That will be B. Now, what next?
B. Then?
E. Correct. Then it will move to the right subtree.
Then the right subtree, it will go to the C, F, G.
So it will start with C or F?
Go with the C, then F, then G. So this is a preorder
traversal of this example. Now, let's do the postorder of the same tree.
What will be the first node?
Postorder. Okay, so that means first we will do the left subpart, then the right
subpart, and then at the end, we will do the node.
So we will start with the extreme left, that is D.
So D will be your first node. Then?
So again, Amrita, understand the concept. We are doing the postorder.
So first left, then right, then node. The left part is D.
What will be the right part?
It will be E. Then the node.
The node is
B. Correct. So B will be the option. Then move to the right subpart.
Then the right subpart, what will be the node?
C or G?
No. Amit, we can't directly go to the C.
Okay, because if you're going to the C, then you have to traverse A also.
Okay, so first we have to cover the entire right part. So it will be G.
Then?
F.
Correct, F. And then C, and then A. So this is how the
postorder traversal work. Is it clear to everyone how the preorder and postorder
traversal is working?
Okay. Now, coming to the inorder.
Now tell me, what will be the first node?
So in the inorder, first we will go with the left part,
then node, and then the right part.
So we will start with the extreme left, that is D,
then B. Correct. Then?
E. Correct.
Then what will be the next node?
A. Correct. Then?
So C.
So we have covered the left part. We have moved to the root node.
Then we have to cover the right part.
So in the right part, if you scroll down,
we have to cover the C, F, and G. So we can't
directly go with the C part first. We have to move to the F, and then we have to
check whether you have any left child of F or not. We don't have any left child.
So we will directly go to the F,
then G.
And then once it is done, we will again traverse again.
So this is called the inorder traversal.
Is that coming clear to everyone?
Pre and post. Yeah. I mean, which is confusing, Amrita?
The inorder traversal?
I mean, this is very easy. I mean, understand the concept here.
Okay, you have this node. First, you have to traverse
the left. Okay, this will be your first, this will be your second, and then this
will be your third.
Okay. Again, we know the formula is left
node and then right.
So first traverse the left part. So we will start with the left.
Left, node, right. Clear?
Why this DB is coming?
Okay. Then node.
This is the node, so we will include A.
Now,
this is done. This is done. Now moving on to the right part.
Okay, forget everything. This is the right node. Okay.
As we know the formula is left and LNR.
So come to the L. Come to the left of C. So we have F.
Do we have anything of left of F? No.
So then what we will do is we will simply print F.
Then right of F. G.
And once everything is done, we move to C.
Okay, so again, you have to remember the formula.
Okay.
Now, let's take an example of this tree.
Suppose these are the tree, and we have to traverse the preorder.
Okay, A. Okay, so understand, we have to do the preorder.
Pre means
first,
what is the formula of preorder?
The first we will traverse the node.
Then?
Yes, NLR. Node, left, and right.
Correct. So first we will start with the root node, that is A.
Then the next one will be
left part.
Go to the left side.
B. Mm-hmm. Then?
D. Correct. Then?
F. Then?
H. Then I. And then E. C and G.
Correct, Amrita. Yeah. This is how you have to do the preorder. Same.
If you have to do the postorder, then?
Postorder. That means LRM. The first to the left part.
So we will start with
which node?
The extreme left.
H,
then I, then F, then D, then E, then
B.
So Amrita, understand the concept here, okay? Your answer is incorrect.
LRM.
Okay, then move to the right part, G, D, and A.
Any doubts in the postorder traversal?
Is that clear? The postorder.
No. Complete silent into the chat.
Amrita, Amit.
Yeah, you need some practice. Okay.
This is the portion which you can expect in your end-term exam.
Okay, coming to the inorder. Inorder means
LNR.
Okay. So go with the left-hand side.
We will start with D because this is the extreme left,
then R.
Okay. Now, your left-hand side is done.
DSFIBE. Left-hand side is done. Moving on to the right-hand side, we will go to the
A, C, and G. So this will be your inorder traversal.
So Ashu, you have to decide. For example, which left node means?
For example, you are going to the left-hand side, and then you are finding if there
is extreme left.
Why it is extreme left? Okay, let's take an example. Okay.
Suppose you're going to the left-hand side. Okay. This is your left sub-tree.
Okay, forget everything. This is your left sub-tree. Now, you are here. Okay.
Now, you have come to the node number D. Do we have anything to the left of D?
No. So that means D is extreme left because whatever the things we have, for
example, F and I, this is the right side of the D, but not the left-hand side.
Okay. That is why D is extreme left.
Okay? Similarly, if you go to the right-hand side, so now here H is extreme left.
That is why first B came, then H came
in this sequence.
Okay, so just do some practice.
Again, from... Yeah, Alfred Tricky.
Time complexity if the preorder traversal
is almost constant, okay, because we are
traversing each node only once and with the constant time, and
constant, I mean, the same operation is performed.
So overall time will always be ON, okay, where N is a number of nodes.
Okay? The time complexity of the preorder traversal.
Okay, algorithm no one is going to ask, okay, so we are skipping that.
That is done. Okay. So that was all
about the trees. Now moving on to the graphs. Graphs you all know.
You all have studied in your graph theory.
Okay, it is a combination of vertices and edges.
Okay, just like tree. In the tree, we have the nodes and edges.
Similarly, the same nodes will be called as vertex in graph,
and whenever there's an edge, it will represent the relationship between the two
items.
Yes, Amit, the time complexity of the tree traversal is ON because you are doing
the constant operation on every node.
These are certain examples of the graphs, okay, like we have the molecular
structures, okay, or if you have to show the connectivity between how the server or
the devices are connected. Okay, so these are the examples we have.
Formal definition you already know.
A graph is a set of, or you can say a pair of, vertices and edges, okay,
where the vertices are denoted by V and edges are denoted by E.
Just like we have in the tree, okay, we also have the adjacent vertices.
So if you look at this graph, so here you can see the U and V are adjacent because
they have a direct relationship between them.
Suppose if I say,
let's keep this node as Z. Can we say U and Z or W and Z are
adjacent?
No. Oh, yes.
Can we say W and Z are adjacent?
Why? Because there is no edge
between them.
So that is why we can't say W and Z are adjacent. The rest all are adjacent.
Can we say V and W are adjacent?
You can go from V to Z indirectly via U.
But again, there is no direct edge as such.
So whenever there is no direct edge between any two vertices,
okay, we can't say them as adjacent.
Okay, coming to the path and simple path. Do you know what is path and simple path?
If you are traversing, if you are moving from one node to another node,
okay, and then... Correct. If you're traveling from one node to another node, okay,
and then every node is appearing at most once, then it will be called as the
path, or you can say a simple path.
Okay, the path is in the path, the redundancy is allowed.
In simple path, every node will appear at most once.
So redundancy is usually not possible in simple path.
You can easily go from V1 to V5.
Okay, so if I have to go from V1 to V5, I can actually go from V1 to V2, V2 to V4,
or V4 to V5.
But here, this is not a path.
Sorry, this is a path, but this is not a simple path.
In a simple path, you have to cover every node.
So the simple path will be V1 to V2, V2 to V3, V3 to V4, V4 to V5.
Is that clear?
Path and simple path
Okay.
Now, same with cycle and simple cycle.
Cycle, if you are starting, if the cycle is a path that begins and adds at the same
node.
Okay. Similarly, if I talk about the simple cycle, that means every node
will appear at most once, except the first and the last one.
Amrita, you are saying path we can skip and simple path we can skip. Sorry.
You are saying the same thing.
In simple path, we can't skip.
Correct.
Similarly,
the connected graph. A graph is said to be connected if there exists a path between
them,
any pair of distinct nodes. Otherwise, it will be called as disconnected.
Now, look at the graph. Can we say this graph is connected?
This graph is connected. Why? Because every node is connected to every other node.
Okay, there is no isolation as such.
So if I have to move from V1 to V5, I can directly go.
Although there is no direct path, but indirect path is there.
So this is called a connected graph.
Okay, these are the, put an example of disconnected graph.
So V1 to V7, there is no path.
Okay, so we will call it as the disconnected graph.
We can't go directly from V1 to V7.
Okay, so this is another graph, and then there is no path between these two things.
So disconnected.
Atinderdeep, you are saying second is disconnected.
If you're looking at individually second graph, this is connected.
We can go. V8 to V9 is possible. V8 to V6 possible, V8 to V7 possible.
Okay. So individual graph is not...
They both are, individually, they are connected graph.
But if you look at the whole picture,
this will be called as a disconnected graph because
you don't have a path between V1 and V7.
Okay?
Yeah. Okay, again, the same thing is there, connected component.
If the graph is disconnected, it can be partitioned into the number of two
different graphs.
Now, moving on to the third one, that is complete graph. What is complete graph?
Complete graph means
there is a node between every pair.
Okay, so if you look at the graph here, every node is having a pair, or every pair
is having an edge between them.
Okay, so this is called a complete graph.
Connectivity, yes.
Weighted graph. Weighted graph you all know?
Where the edges have any weight assigned.
That will be called as the weighted graph.
Directed graph, where you have directions defined.
So here you can see a directed arrow.
Okay.
So whenever you have the direction defined in a graph, it will be called as the
directed graph, or sometimes it is also called as digraph.
Okay, then we have the multigraph.
Multigraph means
where we have the multiple edges between two nodes.
Okay, so wherever there is a multiple edges between two nodes, or you can say the
self-edge is there.
Okay, suppose we have these two nodes.
Okay, these two nodes we have. So you can see, this is also one edge, this is also
one edge. So we have the multiple edges.
So whenever we have the multiple edges, it will form a loop.
Similarly, there's a self-edge. Again, this will be a loop.
So any graph which contains a loop or multiple edges will be called as
multigraph.
Okay, moving on to the property of the graph.
So yeah, we know an undirected graph that is connected and has no
cycle is a tree. Okay. A tree with N node have exactly N-1
edges, and a connected undirected graph with N edges must
have at least N-1 edges. Okay. So again, these are basic properties of the graph.
Coming to the implementation of the graph, so this is quite easy.
Okay, you have the graph. Okay, now what you have to do is,
you just have to represent the nodes here, and then whenever there's a edge between
them, you mark it as 1, otherwise mark it as 0.
Is it clear? The edge is symmetric
of a directed graph whenever there's a directed graph between nodes.
Okay, so this is how you get two.
Similarly, if you have the undirected graph, so the process is similar, but what
you have to do is, if these are undirected, that means there is no direction as
such, so you will mention the weight, and whenever there is no edge, you will mark
it as infinite sign.
The process is same.
Clear?
Yes, no, maybe.
Okay. Yeah, Amit.
In the directed graph, you don't need to put the width.
Okay, you just have to mention the one, okay, if there is a edge.
But in the undirected graph, you have to mention the width.
Okay. Again, the same graph can be represented in the form of list as well.
So whenever you have the graph and then someone is saying that, okay, can you
represent in the form of list? Just mention down all the vertices we have, and then
whenever there is a edge, just create a list.
If there is no direct edge between V2 and V5, we cannot assume the width.
No, no, we can't.
We can't. We are not doing any Prim's or Kruskal's algorithm. Okay?
So I think, the Prim's, Kruskal will take time, and
we don't have that much level of
time as such. So yeah, so what we're going to do is, we're going to cover the
shortest path and
the spanning tree concept,
maybe in the next class. And then, yeah, because these are the important things
from the exam perspective, so we can cover.
And then, we'll also do the searching and sorting, and then, there's another
complex topic that is coming, that is
the LP.
Okay. So yeah, so that we will cover.
Okay, whatever you have in your syllabus, the important part.
I'm not going to cover the entire syllabus, okay, because for that you need
the whole classes, five to six-hour classes.
But in one hour, whatever that is important from the exam perspective, we will
cover those.
Okay.
Anything else
before we wind up the class?
In matrix, Atinder, you have to implement an infinite sign only whenever there's
an undirected graph, plus
edge between the vertices. Then you will mark that at infinity sign.
Will be undirected graph, not in the directed one.
In the directed one, you have to mark it as zero.
Cool. Okay, thank you so much for your time today, and see you all in the next
class then.
The recording will be available in the Amico portal, so you can easily get access
to that. And yeah, NP-hard is one of the topic which will take time, so that we
will cover. NP-hard, NP-complete.
