CSE601 — Live Class 1 Transcript
Subject: Data Structures and Algorithm Design (CSE601) — Semester II
Topic: Overview of Data Structure
Date & Time: 13-Sep-26 & 11:00-12:00
AMIGO: https://amigo.amityonline.com/mod/page/view.php?id=377963
Vimeo: https://player.vimeo.com/video/1226396683?h=c7481ece6d
Duration: ~62 min (3718s)
Source: Vimeo auto-generated English captions
All right.
Yeah. So today will be our first session, and we will start the introduction to
data structure and algorithmic design. Okay.
So I hope you all are aware of the guidelines.
Okay, this will be an interactive session.
So I want everyone to equally participate in the session.
And if you have any doubts, any queries, feel free to ask during the class, okay,
and I will try to answer that. Okay?
So before we start, I just wanted to have a quick pulse check on the group.
So do you have any basic understanding of what the algorithm is
and how to write the algorithm?
Anyone?
We just got-
Any idea?
No. Yes. Maybe.
All right.
So I will consider silence as yes. Okay.
So we will start with the basic introduction of the data structure and algorithmic
design. Okay. So before we start, do you know what is data structure?
How many of you already aware of what a data structure is?
Any idea?
Data are the collection of raw facts and figures, or you can say the values are the
set of values. Okay, and structure means that how you are organizing the data.
So if I combine these two terms, the data structure means that the way of
organizing the data in such a way that it will become more
efficient for the assessing. Okay, that is called the data structure.
Similarly, so at the end of the session, we will be able to cover these concepts.
We will discuss the data structure, we will discuss the types of data structures,
the applications,
the different algorithms, and then ADT. ADT is not in your syllabus.
That is the abstract data type. Okay, so we going to skip that part.
Okay, but we will try to cover today these four important topics. Okay?
So let's start with the terminology. What is algorithm?
Algorithm means, any idea what is algorithm?
This is all about topic. Algorithm. Anyone?
Set of instruction.
Set of instructions. Okay.
Can you please elaborate?
Set of instruction.
Because a program is also considered a set of instruction.
Then what is the difference between program and algorithm?
Anyone?
No, sir.
No?
Yeah. So you are partially correct.
The algorithm is the step-by-step instruction, or you can say the
step-by-step procedure to solve any given problem,
while the program is the set of instruction.
So if you are including the instruction, the software instruction, without any
order, it can be considered as a program. Okay?
It is different that it will not generate the desired output, but you can call it
as a program. But if you are following a step-by-step
procedure, or if you're following the step-by-step solution to any given problem,
then it will be called as
the algorithm.
Okay, so both programming and the algorithm, they are actually interrelated.
Okay, so if you have a good algorithm, you will be able to write good program, but
the vice versa is not true.
Okay, so you have to focus more on the understanding of the logic.
If you are good with the logic, you can easily write program, you can easily write
the algorithm.
Have you heard about the term pseudocode?
Any one of you, pseudocode.
Any idea what is pseudocode? Pseudo means false, coding means a
normal code. So if you are writing a code in a normal English
language, it will be called as the pseudocode.
Okay, so I hope that now the concept is clear. What is algorithm?
Algorithm is a step-by-step instruction, or you can say the step-by-step
procedure to solve any given problem. Is that clear to everyone?
What is algorithm?
So whenever we write any program-
Sir, can you repeat that again? I just joined.
Right, Amrita. So Amrita, we have just started, we were discussing on what a data
structure is. So I told others that data structure is a way of organizing the
data. Okay, so data is simply a raw facts or figure, so you can say the
values or the set of values. Okay, and there's a difference between the data and
the information. Okay, so data become information when it get processed.
For example, if I give an example of a mark sheet.
So in the mark sheet, suppose if I say that, Amrita, you got 90
marks in mathematics. Do you think you are pass or fail?
Will you be able to tell the overall result?
No, because the individual marks will not be able to justify that overall
context. If I'm not giving you the overall context, how can someone determine it
whether that person is pass or fail?
Okay, so that is called as the data. The data is simply a raw fact.
Okay, it is just giving you that, okay, that someone is securing 90 marks in
English or 90 marks in math. But if you don't know the denominator, how can you
identify that whether that person is pass or fail?
So anything which is not giving you the information, anything which is just a
normal fact, is called a data.
Okay. Well, Ashish is busy in solving the Rubik cube.
So Ashish, is that clear to you?
So
when the data get processed, it will become an information.
Right, for example, in a mark sheet. So you have the multiple datas.
Okay, when these datas get consolidated in a single page where we have all the
denominator, we have all the maximum marks, then it will become a information.
So by looking at the mark sheet, you can easily tell that whether that person's,
what is the division, what is the overall percentage, what is the CGPA, what is the
SGPA. So everything you can easily get.
Okay, so data in a processed form is called as information.
But data itself is a raw fact, and the organizing of the data in the form
of meaningful way, or so that you can easily access the data whenever you want,
this is called the data structure.
Okay? Then we discuss the concept of algorithm.
Algorithm is a step-by-step procedure to solve any given problem.
Okay, someone said that algorithm is nothing.
Algorithm is a set of instruction, which is partially correct.
Algorithm is a set of instruction.
Even the programming program also is a set of instruction.
But the only difference between program and algorithm is that in program, the
instruction sequence can be anything, but in the algorithm, you have to follow a
specific sequence. So whenever you write any program, you have to focus on two
things. The first is the algorithm and its corresponding data structure.
Is that clear to you now, Amrita, what did we discuss?
Yes, sir.
Okay. Yeah.
So moving on. So we have already gone through the data set that we have gone to the
algorithm. So what are the different characteristics you can think about the
algorithm? What do you think that whenever you write any algorithm, what are the
basic things that you have to consider?
Any idea?
Sir, time complexity and space complexity.
Time complexity and space complexity. Very good.
These are the two major things.
But these are the time complexity and the space complexity is the
measurement. I'm asking about the characteristics of an algorithm.
Data type, sir.
Data type. Okay.
Anyone else?
Sir, it should be readable, less complicated.
Mm-hmm.
Readable, less complicated. Correct. Okay. What else?
Sir, the algorithm should be universal, right?
For all the,
means we can use different data, and the output will be correct for
that.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. You guys are absolutely correct.
I mean, the readability, the usability,
everything is right.
Even you guys are forgetting the basic thing.
The first thing is that the input. Input
means that whatever the algorithm that you have, it should have at least one input.
You can't design any algorithm which is not having any input.
Are you getting my point? So whatever the algorithm that you are designing, it
should have at least one input.
Input, process, and then output.
Correct. So that is the, I mean, this is the exact sequence of how the information
gets processed. You will give some information, your computer will process some
instruction, and then it will give you an output.
That's the other way.
Okay. So similarly, what you have to do is... Just a second.
Right.
So,
whenever you design any algorithm, so it must have at least one input.
For example, suppose if I ask you that I hope everyone knows how to make a tea.
Everyone knows how to make a tea?
Is there anyone who is not aware? How can you create a tea? Or not create.
How can you process a tea? How can you make a tea? Everyone?
What is the first step in making a tea?
Boiling water.
You have to take water, you have to boil it. Okay. Then?
You have to add?
Adding ingredients.
Adding ingredients. Ingredients may include the sugar, the tea leaves, milk.
You have to boil it for a certain temperature and for a certain interval of time,
and then you have to refrain it. This is the overall step of making a tea.
Yes, sir.
Right. Now, if I change the sequence, so what I did, I just followed the sequence
of the step. Okay, first you have to boil the water, then you have to add tea
leaves, then you have to add sugar, then you have to add milk, et cetera, and then
you will be able to get your final output.
If I change the sequence, will I be able to make a tea?
Not correctly, no.
Not correctly. Absolutely.
We'll be able to make, but the taste will not be like that.
Correct. Right. So I will be, I mean, the final output will be a tea, but the taste
will be airy. Okay? The taste will not sound like, just like an actual tea.
Okay, so similarly, in algorithm also, you have different steps, but if you change
the sequence of the step, okay, your program will behave differently.
And just like an example, okay, in the tea making, the ingredients were
considered as an input. Similarly, in algorithm, you need certain input.
If you're not putting the sugar, if you're not putting the water, if you're not
putting the milk or tea leaf, you will not be able to get your final output as a
tea.
Right? So the first thing, which is important from an algorithm perspective, is
that every algorithm must have an input. Is that clear to everyone?
Yes, sir.
Right. The second thing is, what do you mean by second characteristic?
It should have at least one output.
At least one. I mean, it may have more than one output, but at least one output
should be there. If your algorithm is not generating any output, that means your
algorithm is useless.
Clear?
Yes, sir.
The third step. Can anyone help me with the third step?
What is the third characteristic you can expect from an algorithm?
It should solve a given problem.
Final result.
Final result we have already discussed, right, in the form of output.
What else?
Finite step.
Finite step. Yeah. Absolutely correct. Finite step.
That means that whatever the number of steps that you are writing in your
algorithm, it should be finite. Finite means?
Finite means it should end after some steps, okay?
There should not be any infinite number of steps.
Obviously, you can't write an algorithm that can run infinitely.
It should be executed. It should be terminated after a few steps.
Are you guys agreeing with this?
Yes, sir.
Whatever the steps that we are writing-
Yes, sir
... it should have finiteness. Okay.
What will be the next characteristic of an algorithm?
Definiteness.
Definiteness. Definiteness or definiteness.
That means that whatever the steps that you are writing in your algorithm, it
should be unambiguous. Now, again, a new English word, unambiguous.
Unambiguous means?
Something which is clear.
Clear. There should not be any confusion.
Okay, you can't write a very complicated statement in your algorithm.
Just like I gave an example of tea. In the tea, everything is very clear and crisp.
Okay? Everything is defined.
Okay. Now, if I come up with a very hypothetical step that, hey, I need a water
which is coming from XYZ company, and then, a lot of other things which I...
If I add the complexity, obviously, it is not satisfying the requirement.
Okay? The requirement of the algorithm.
So what are the four things which we have discussed?
The input, the output, the definiteness, the finiteness.
I need one more.
Correctness.
Correctness we have already discussed.
Feasibility.
Feasibility. Yes.
Feasibility, or you can say the effectiveness of an algorithm, that whatever the
algorithm that you are writing, it should be executed with the number of available
resources. Suppose if my computer is of 2 GB RAM, and if I'm writing an algorithm
which is actually consuming 8 GB and 16 GB of memory, then do you think that that
memory is feasible, that algorithm is feasible?
No, sir.
Right. So these are the certain things you have to remember whenever you design
your algorithm. Your input, your output, your definiteness, your finiteness, and
the last is the effectiveness, or you can say the feasibility.
Okay, so we have discussed algorithm steps.
Okay, these are the things which I told you. Right.
So you don't need to remember each and every step, okay?
In the exam paper, they will simply ask you what is the algorithm, what are the
characteristics of an algorithm.
So you just have to mention algorithm, a basic example of algorithm, and then these
five steps: input, output, definiteness, finiteness, and effectiveness.
Clear?
Yes, sir.
Okay, so now, whenever you start develop any algorithm, so there are two
ways by which you can measure the effectiveness of an algorithm.
Right, the last step was effectiveness, how you can measure the effectiveness of an
algorithm.
I remember someone was saying the time complexity and the space complexity.
Yes, sir.
Right. So time complexity. The complexity measurement is the way of measurement
of any algorithm effectiveness.
Have you heard about the time complexity, space complexity?
In algorithm contest, any one of you?
Yes. Just know the symbol only.
You know the symbol only? Okay.
Yeah.
That's good. That's enough. Okay. From the exam standpoint, that is enough. Okay.
Obviously, I have never seen any questions on algorithmic complexity
in the last five to six years,
whatever the question paper I have seen.
Sir, can you just little elaborate this term that complexity, time complexity,
because it is everywhere in the book, but nothing is specifically about that.
Yeah.
It's just written the symbol everywhere.
Sure.
Yeah. So,
why do we need this? First of all, why do we need these notations?
You mentioned that these notations are mentioned everywhere in the book.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. You might have seen big O, little o, omega notation, theta notation,
something like that in your book. Right? Why do we need these notations?
Sir, just like you said, for feasibility.
Yeah.
Like how much space it will take, use case complexity.
If you have to measure the weight, you need a unit that is kilogram or gram.
If you need to measure a liquid, you need a liter or milliliter.
If you have to measure a distance, you need a kilometer, meter or centimeter. Okay?
So every measurement is associated with certain unit.
Similarly, for algorithmic measure, if you have to measure the time taken by
an algorithm to execute or to give the exact input,
that is called the time complexity.
Okay, I will go one by one.
Yeah, but sir, the different unit, how it tell that this-
I'll tell you.
Okay.
I'll tell you.
Okay.
Okay. So first understand the meaning of time complexity.
Is that clear to everyone? Time complexity means the time taken by an algorithm
to produce a desired output.
But sir, on different computers, it would take different amount of time.
So how will we measure that?
So that is why, your algorithm is depending on the number of resources.
Okay?
No, but you are saying the time complexity needs basically the amount of time an
algorithm takes, but different computers, on the basis of its performance, will
take different amount of time for the same algorithm, right?
Mm-hmm.
So it's not-
Whenever you design your algorithm, okay, you have to consider the available
resources also.
Okay? Okay, let me simplify. Suppose whenever we're writing a program,
okay, suppose you are creating a program of addition of two number.
I hope everyone knows how to add two numbers in any of the language.
Yes.
Okay. Now, if you are creating on a
machine which is having a very high-end configuration.
Suppose it is having an SSD, it is having a 16 GB RAM, DDR3, DDR4 RAM, okay, with
GPU and everything is enabled. What do you think?
What is the time it will take to execute?
Some milliseconds, sir.
Some milliseconds?
Yeah.
Okay.
Sir, depends on the system that we are using to calculate.
Uh-huh. Okay. Understood. Suppose the same program is executed on a normal
machine. Okay? It is
having a very normal configuration, like 1 GB RAM, okay, and a very basic resource.
Now tell me, how much time it will take?
But how can you tell, sir, unless we know the specs of the system, right?
On a basic respect, okay, I'm giving you a very basic example.
Suppose you have a normal computer lab system, normal computer lab, which is very
basic, 1 GB RAM, okay, 250 GB hard disk, 100 GB hard disk.
Sir, it might take some second, like one second or two second.
Okay.
It depends upon the number of steps the algorithm has.
Correct.
So now the concept should be clear to everyone.
It is not dependent on the hardware configuration.
It is dependent on the number of steps.
It is dependent on the instruction, how you have written, how many variables you
have taken,
what logic you have followed.
Okay, so your algorithm execution will depend on how you have written this
statement.
Okay, the same algorithm will take the same time.
Sir, basically just like AI, sometimes this command is going on, that command is
going on. Is that maybe also related to this?
That-
Yeah. I
hope that everyone is using ChatGPT.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
So whenever you use the ChatGPT, we have two ways to get the answer.
The first is the fastest model, which will give you the result based on the
available repository.
Yeah.
Okay? So if you ask a very simple question, what is data structure?
The ChatGPT will give you the definition of data structure, the type of data
structure, and everything along with the example.
Yeah.
Okay? Because it is stored in their repository.
The second way of searching in the ChatGPT is the thinking mode.
I hope that you all have seen the thinking mode.
Yeah.
It is just at bottom left corner.
Yes, sir.
Right. So if you enable the thinking mode, now it will give you the result based
on the current state, and it will start thinking from your perspective, and then it
will give you the result.
Okay, so the same query will generate different output
based on the mode selection.
Okay, so what is happening, now it is not using its pre-stored repository.
It is now making a request to the public repositories, which are actually available
on the Google or any other social media platform or any other searching platform,
and there it will gather the request response.
Okay, so now the thinking mode will always take time,
while if you are sending the request directly without enabling the thinking mode,
it will be executed in a less time.
So the time complexity will tell us that how the running time will grow when the
amount of data increase. So if I gave an example that suppose you have to add two
numbers,
okay, and then you have to give the output, the number of input is same, the number
of output is same. The time complexity will remain always same, irrespective of
whatever the machine that you are executing.
Is that clear to everyone?
We are not making changes in the input and output.
And that is not the case every time, because in the real world programming, the
input and output keeps on changing. It keeps on increasing.
Suppose your banking application.
Your banking applications are designed in such a way that it handles a multiple
input at the same time.
Right? Your gaming application. Your gaming application deals with the multiple
input at the same time. How can you clearly estimate that a person will click only
on these three buttons? There might be a possibility that if he want to click
multiple button at the same time,
then how you will determine that, how your algorithm will behave?
So that is the beauty of the time complexity and the space complexity.
You have to determine that how this algorithm will behave if I'm increasing the
number of input, if I'm increasing the number of amount of the data.
Okay, suppose as of now, my algorithm is only accepting two inputs.
It is working fine. It is giving me an output in millisecond.
Now, what will happen if I increase the out number of input, if I increase the
amount of data? Obviously, it will take more time. Are you guys agreeing with this?
Yes, sir.
Yes. The algorithm which is taking input, okay, because in my case, I have given
you the constraint that I need a program which will only accept two number.
So irrespective of any machine, it will only take two number.
The amount of data is not going to increase.
So we will have the constant time complexity
But if my amount of data is increasing, then what will happen?
My time complexity will also grow.
Suppose it is taking one millisecond at this moment.
If the amount of data grows, then what will happen?
It will take more time to execute.
Yes, sir.
Right. Again, a very simple example because the complexity is very important topic.
Suppose you have four people. Suppose you have,
let's say, Utkarsh, Rahul, Amit, and Ravi. These are the four people you have.
Okay, and now you want to find the Ravi.
So your computer may check the first person name. It is matching? No.
Go to the second person name. No. Third person name. No. Fourth person. Yes.
So what it will do is, what it is doing, it is taking the item one by one.
Agree? Yes or no?
Yes, sir.
Okay. So what will be the time complexity of this is?
Linear, depending on the number of input?
Yes. O .
Okay, so O will be the time complexity.
Now-
Yes
... if I ask you that now we have 1,000 people, and then you have to find
out the particular person, XYZ. So obviously
the more the number of the student, more will be the time.
Yes, sir.
Yes.
But the time complexity will always remain constant, O ?
O , yes, sir.
Okay. So this is how the time complexity is measured because the way
through which we have written our program, the way our computer program is checking
the instruction, this is how they determine
the time complexity.
Now, if I have included the binary search or, what I say, the
different searching technique. Okay.
There are two types of searching technique, linear searching, binary search.
I hope you know these things.
Yes. Yes, sir.
Right. So what we are doing right now is linear searching.
We are doing one-by-one check.
Now, if I do the binary search, then what will happen?
The time complexity will change.
Yes.
Okay. It will become a login.
Login.
I hope, Ashima, you're-
Yes, sir
... understand the concept of login and login.
Yes.
Right. So login means anything, any value which is less than N. Okay?
Then we will consider that slot.
Sir, how do we decide means, what is difference between big O and omega and-
Yeah, I'm coming to that topic. But are you guys clear with the time complexity?
Yes, sir.
Okay. Now, moving on to the space complexity.
Okay, I will tell you big O, little o, everything. Okay.
Now, coming to the space complexity. Space complexity means?
How much space, uh, algorithm is taking.
Right. So again, it is all dependent on the number of inputs.
The space complexity will tell you that how much additional memory a program will
require if the input size will get grow.
Okay. For example, suppose you are creating a program where you are taking an
age or salary as an input. Okay, so suppose if my age is 35,
okay, so if I will write int age is equal to 35, int salary, let's say
15,000. 15,000 is my salary. Okay, so what I'm doing is I'm using a fixed number of
variables. I have defined the age as constant.
I have defined my salary as a fixed constant.
So even if the input will become huge, for example, if I say that, okay, salary is
not 15,000, salary is 50 lakh, what do you think? What will be my space complexity?
The space complexity will be constant. Why?
Because we are using the constant values.
Yes, sir.
But if I'm using some variables value, suppose my salary is 50,000
rupees plus XYZ of 10% of XYZ, and then 70%
of DA and 80% of HR, something like that.
Then now what my data is, my data is continuously growing. It is not fixed.
So now the space complexity will get changed because now my amount of
data is increasing.
Is that clear to everyone?
Yes, sir.
Sir, I just-
Yes
... want to clear this up.
If in the time complexity, we are growing the value, or we are
growing the data-
Mm-hmm
... I mean, the data is increasing, then it will be-
Mm-hmm
... constant, and in space complexity, it will not be constant.
That's what you mean, sir?
Yes.
Okay.
Sir?
Yeah.
Sir, will the space complexity will depend on the data types we use in an
algorithm?
Yep.
Like in Java-
Mm-hmm
... number data type have different byte size-
Mm-hmm
... character have different byte size.
Mm-hmm.
In space complexity will change whether we use number or character,
right?
This is right. No, it's depending on the data type. Okay.
In C, the space complexity might be different if you are using any other language
like Java or .NET or Python or, I mean, the newly born language
like Rust, Scala, and Perl, Ruby, et cetera.
So you will get a different set of data types.
So it depends-
Yes
... what data type you are using. Okay. Now, coming to the measurement.
So as I mentioned in the beginning, that you need a certain unit to measure.
So for measuring the time complexity and the space complexity, okay, you need
a measurement, and those measurement are called as, those units are called as
asymptotic notations. Have you heard this term, asymptotic notation?
No, sir.
Anyone? Yes, no?
No, sir.
No? Okay.
Heard about that, but don't know about that.
Okay. This is written in your module number one only.
Yeah.
Okay, the asymptotic notation. So asymptotic, I can write into the chat so that you
can
search on Google as well.
It is asymptotic
notations.
I hope my chat is visible to everyone.
Yes, sir.
Okay. Yeah, so asymptotic notation.
So asymptotic notation will tell you that how you can measure the time and the
space complexity. So we have big O, little o, big Theta, I mean Theta notations, et
cetera. So let's start with the first one, that is big O.
What do you mean by big O? Any idea?
Sir, it measures the worst case.
It measures the worst case.
Yeah.
No, sir, big O.
Big O, yeah. I mean, pick up. So big O will always tell you the upper bound of an
algorithm.
So you are absolutely right, the worst case.
I mean, it will tell you that how much time can this algorithm will take
at worst-case scenario.
Okay. So for example, suppose, everyone is familiar with the loop?
Yes, sir.
Right. Suppose if I create a loop, okay, I am using a for loop.
For i is equal to zero, I'm initializing with zero, i is less than n,
i++.
And then what I'm doing is I'm printing the value of i.
Can you tell me how many times this loop will execute?
n times.
n time?
Yes.
Yes, sir.
Okay, so what will be the time complexity? The time complexity of this is O .
O .
Okay, why? Because the algorithm which we have written, this algorithm will not
grow faster than the approximately,
the value which we have defined, n.
If I say that, okay, that this value is going beyond the value of n, no, it will
never happen. It will only take one by one, because this is a loop.
So the maximum value is defined earlier. The upper bound is already defined as n.
So-
So whenever you have
upper value which is already defined of an algorithm, you will always measure in
terms of big O.
Any doubts before we move into the little o?
Clear to everyone? Yes, no?
Yes, sir.
Okay.
Moving on to the omega. Can you tell me what does this omega notation signifies?
Sir, it signifies the best case, the lower bound.
The lower bound.
Lower bound. Yes. So O notation, the big O will always tell you the upper bound.
The omega will always give you the lower bound.
That means that what is the minimum amount of work this algorithm must do in order
to get the result.
Okay. For example, I hope everyone is familiar with the linear search.
Suppose we have four element
and I want to search the first element only.
Then how much time it will take?
The first element, obviously the constant time.
Okay.
That is omega one.
Yes.
Right. So omega notation will always give you the lower bound of an algorithm.
Okay. That means that what is the minimum amount of time, what is the minimum
amount of work this algorithm will do.
Now, moving on to the last one. That is the theta notation. Theta is a which bound?
Upper bound or lower bound?
Tight bound.
Theta is a tight bound.
Tight bound.
Tight bound means that both upper and lower.
So if an algorithm is growing at a constant rate, at the same rate in both the
upper side and both the lower side, then it will be called as the theta notation.
Can you give me an example of theta notation?
Anyone. Consider the same loop which I told
you. For loop, int I is equal 0, I is less than N,
I++.
And then what we are doing is system.out.print ln I.
Now, can anyone of you tell me what is the maximum number of step it can take?
N.
N. So N is the upper bound?
Yes.
Okay. What is the minimum number of steps?
One.
Minimum.
Minimum is also N.
I
mean, this loop which I told you, I is equal to 0, I is less than N, I++,
it cannot run significantly less than N time.
Right.
It will have to follow the complete loop, right?
Yes, sir.
Okay. And it also cannot run significantly more than N time.
Yes.
Okay. So therefore, the time complexity of this case will be theta N.
Is that clear?
Yes.
Omega, O and theta notation. Any doubts?
Sir, theta I didn't get it, sir, actually.
Yeah.
Sir, theta means is it like
when we require an output and when we use the best config laptop and the
worst config laptop, and both the time is same-
Mm-hmm.
For that algorithm.
Yeah.
So,
sorry, I forgot. Amrita, were you asking the theta notation?
Yes, sir.
Okay, Amrita, so theta notation means tight bound.
That means whatever the algorithm you have designed, it will take the constant time
everywhere.
Either in the worst case scenario or the best case scenario.
Every time it will take the same time. Both worst case and best case are same.
Okay. Even if we increase the data also that will-
That also. Yeah. In that case also, it will take the same time.
So that will be your tight bound, theta.
Okay.
Okay? Now, moving on to the next one. That is little o.
Okay, what type of bound little o is?
Omega, lower bound.
No. What is o? O is the upper bound.
Oh, got you.
So little o is strict upper bound.
Okay.
Okay? So whenever you write little o, you have to mention strict upper bound.
Now, what do you mean by strict upper bound?
In that it will check only the upper bound.
It means that whatever the algorithm we have, it will grow strictly slower than the
another function.
That means, for example, suppose we have
big O N square
and little o n square. So if I compare between big O N square and little o n
square. Okay, this is the time complexity.
So it is all dependent on the value of N.
Big O N square is also dependent on N, and little o n square is also dependent on
N.
As soon as the N becomes very large, okay, suppose initially the
value of N is one or two or three, which is fine.
In that case, both the algorithms, the big O and little o, will give the same
result. But now assume that the value of N is keep on increasing.
Now the value of N is thousand or millions.
Okay, in that case, what will happen?
Even the N is becoming a very large, the complexity of the little o
will become much slower.
Very slower rate.
Okay. So big O will always give you the upper limit.
The omega will give you the lower limit.
And then even in the upper limit, if you have to strictly match,
strictly bound to the upper limit, then it will be called as little o.
Little o, I mean, this is very rare.
I mean, I haven't seen any algorithm which is having a little o complexity.
In most of the algorithm which I have seen, their complexity usually lies between
big O and omega.
I hope that now I'm able to solve a little bit doubt
of time complexity.
Yes, sir.
Okay. Yeah, I mean, it is defined in a very detailed manner in your SLN.
So you can refer to that.
Okay, so this is what we have discussed so far, the time and the space complexity.
Okay. Going ahead,
algorithm analysis we have discussed, length of the program, ease of programming we
have done. Okay, the need for data structure.
I hope everyone understand what is the need of data structure.
Yes.
Okay. Data structure, the need is to how you can organize the data so that you can
more efficiently access the data whenever you want.
And it should take less time complexity and less space complexity.
This is the ultimate goal of having a data structure.
Whatever the program that we are designing, it should have less time, less space,
because resources are very costly.
Okay, time is precious. Resources are costly.
You can't waste your time in a single program.
Okay?
Now, how you select the data structure?
Do you think that you can work with the same data structure every time?
Depending on the use case, sir, what we want to do with the data.
Correct. So depending on the use cases.
What's your requirement? If your priority is searching, then you can
go with a different data type. Okay, if your priority is only sorting, then you can
go with a different data structure.
So it's all depending on how you want to tackle.
Any idea? Do you know what are the different type of data structure we have?
Sir, like stack-
List or a-
Linked list, and then tree, stack.
Mm-hmm.
And map.
Tree graph.
Right. So as a programmer, your job is to choose the right data structure based on
the nature of the data and whatever the process that needs to be performed.
So if you choose the wrong structure, obviously your program might run very slowly.
Okay, so from the data structure point of view,
your algorithm will fall into several categories.
Okay, so you might have the searching algorithm, you might have the sorting
algorithm, insertion algorithm, update algorithm, or deletion algorithm.
Okay. So now,
let's take a few different example. So yeah.
So there are two types of data structure.
The primitive data structure and non-primitive data structure.
Any idea what is primitive and non-primitive?
Primitives, sir, they are inbuilt in the language.
Mm-hmm.
For example, arrays, list.
Mm-hmm.
And non-primitive is
manmade, made by a programmer.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah. So non-primitive data structure are those data structures which are created
by human by using the primitive data structures.
Yes.
Okay. For example, arrays, stacks, linked list, queue.
These are all dependent on the primitive one.
Similarly, we also have another classification that is linear and non-linear data
structures. Linear means if your data is stored in the linear manner or in the
sequential manner, then you will call it as a linear data structure.
If your data is getting stored in the form of hierarchy, then it will be called as
the non-linear data structure.
Clear?
Yes, sir.
Now, moving on to the first. ADT is not in your syllabus, so we are not going to
cover that. Okay, so we will start with the first one, that is the stack.
Okay, let's start with the list.
Do you know what is list?
It's like an array, sir, but we can store different data types in a same array.
Okay. Anyone else?
No one?
So, see,
list is, as you mentioned, list is a linear collection of the data element.
It is a linear data structure. But there's a difference between array and list.
Can you tell me the difference between array and list?
Sir, we can only store a single type of elements in an array, but we can store
multiple types in list.
Correct.
Sir, we can store different types in JavaScript also.
Like an array, I can store a string in
same array.
Sir, static and dynamic. Array is static and list is dynamic.
It can grow at any time.
Yes. Just like your normal shopping cart.
Okay, in the shopping cart, whenever you want to add anything, just simply click on
add to cart, and then that item will be added. So what is this?
Sir, same thing can happen with arrays in JavaScript.
Like, in JavaSc-
JavaScript. I mean, where from, where this JavaScript is coming?
No, sir, the thing is,
if there is a data type, you're saying that array is different
from list, then it has to be different for every programming language, no?
Mm-hmm.
So it's not like it is different in Java or it is, but it is similar
in JavaScript.
Okay. So someone mentioned it, the lists are the static one and the...
Sorry, arrays are the static one and lists are the dynamic one.
That is the actual difference. Arrays are always rigid.
You just have to specify the size.
Okay, and you can't insert any element which is beyond the size of an array.
But the lists are dynamic.
Okay, just like in, you all have seen the bucket cart in Amazon or any other
e-commerce platform. Okay, so whenever you do the shopping, you simply add element
one by one.
Okay. And then,
as soon as you add any element, it will add it to the bottom.
So the list will always grow or shrink based on your need.
Okay. So, as I mentioned, the list is a linear data structure where each
element is this separate object, and you can say that it is an ordered set of
data.
Okay. So, it can be different, as you can see on my slide, it can be described as
the difference between the physical order and logical order.
So list will always follow the sequential implementations.
Okay. And it can be implemented in the form of linked list.
I hope everyone has worked on linked list.
Yes.
Okay. Right. So this is how the linked-- So you just have to connect a node.
Whenever you insert any new node, you just have to put a connection with the
previous node, and then you are good to go. In the array, it is not possible.
You have to shift the element.
Remember? In the array, you have to shift the element, then only you have to create
the space, then only you can insert.
In linked list, it is not a shifting of the element.
You can simply connect a node, and a single node can be connected to a multiple
node as well, which is not possible in arrayed.
Yes, sir.
Clear?
Yes, sir.
I know-
Yes, sir
... algorithm is a very complex subject, but you should have to understand the
basic things.
Okay, so linked list implementation we will see. Okay.
We are just covering the basic thing.
Okay, then there will be an individual topic on each and every data structure.
Let's start with the stack. Stack you all know?
Yes.
Okay. Whenever you go to the party or any other functions.
Yes.
Okay. You will see a stack of plates piled up on a table.
So what pattern you follow? FIFO or LIFO?
LIFO.
LIFO. That means the last plate will always be picked the first.
Yes, sir.
Clear? So in the stack, both the insertion and deletion always be performed at
only one end, which is called the top of the stack.
Okay, in the queue, we have different end.
Okay, we have the front end and the rear end.
So insertion will always take from the rear end, while the deletion will always
happen from the front end in the queue.
In the stack, it is totally different.
In the stack, both insertion and deletion will always be performed only at the one
end.
So what are the different operations which are performed on the stack?
The first is-
The Tower of Hanoi.
Yeah, Tower of Hanoi can be done. Tower of Hanoi can be done.
There are other examples also. Okay.
Stack-based applications are very common
Okay, so these are the operations that can be performed on the stack.
We can store, retrieve, and display. Okay.
We have this push and pop operation. Push and pop, you know?
Yeah.
Push means you are adding item to the stack.
Pop means you are deleting item from the stack.
Okay.
So for example, suppose this is on a stack.
Okay, and now you want... Okay, so the top is located at the value 40.
10, 20, 30, 40. Now, as soon as you delete the element, what will happen?
The value of top will be deleted, will be decreased by one.
So now the value of top gets changed.
So after each deletion, there will be the change in the value of top.
Sir?
Yeah.
Sir, suppose if we want to delete
20 only, so our only option is to delete both the top
element and one, right?
Yes.
Okay.
As I mentioned, the deletion and insertion both happens only at the one end, that
is the top.
So you have to bring your pointer to that particular element,
or your pointer element will be called as top.
So first you have to bring your top to that particular element, then only you can
perform the insertion or deletion.
Okay? You can't simply delete the element from the middle.
Obviously, I mean, consider the same example. You are going to the party. Okay.
You saw a pile of plates, and suppose you said that, "Okay, no, I will pick the
plate from the middle." So what will happen?
Rest all the plates above it will be removed or will be broken?
Obviously.
Right. So you can't do that. You just have to follow the one by one, from the top
only.
So there will be a condition when all the elements will be deleted from the stack,
okay? And that condition will be called as the underflow condition.
Okay? That means there is no element left to be deleted. Everything is deleted.
Now the stack is empty.
Okay. Similarly, we also have this overflow condition also.
Can anyone of you tell me what is the overflow condition?
Sir, when it reaches its maximum capacity.
Correct. So that means then when the stack is already full, okay, because
everything has its size now. Okay, so suppose the stack size is 50, and you have
already 50 element in the stack, and now you want to insert the 51 element.
Again, what will happen? There is no space left in the stack.
So in that case, it will be called as the stack overflow condition.
That means that if you further add any element, what will happen?
The element will start deleting. Okay?
You will not be able to add any element.
So both underflow and overflow conditions are very important in the stack
programming.
Okay?
Sir.
Yeah.
Sir, in exam, do we have to write the pseudocode for it?
Yes.
They may ask you to write the pseudocode.
Okay, sir.
Okay, yeah. I saw a few questions in the last semester.
Okay. So there were a few questions where they asked to write a pseudocode or write
an algorithm. So whenever you will get a question in your exam to write an
algorithm, you just have to write the pseudocode.
No need to write the entire algorithms because there will be very high chances that
you will get it wrong,
okay, or there will be a syntax mistake and you will not be able to complete your
algorithm. So always write the pseudocode.
See, this is one example of the pseudocode.
Okay, so this is the way how you should write in your exam.
Okay, so now what we are doing is, I think we are over time, but let me quickly
cover this. Okay, suppose we are inserting an element or we are pushing any element
into the stack. So what is the first thing we have to check is?
The underflow condition.
Sorry, the overflow condition. If we are inserting any element, first we have to
check whether there is any empty space or not.
So how we will determine? We will have to address the pointer of the
top. So where is the location of the top pointer?
If it is equal to the stack size minus one.
Because why we are keeping a stack size minus one?
The last index is included in the one.
Correct. So what we are doing is we will check the location of the top pointer.
If the value of the top pointer is equal to the stack size minus one, that means
the stack is already full. Okay, there is no space left.
So what we will do is, we will simply write print F, stack overflow, and then
return. I hope everyone knows what is the purpose of return statement.
It will automatically come out of the loop.
Sorry, out of the if condition.
Yes, sir.
Okay? Now, suppose the top is not equal to stack size minus one, that means there
is a space left in the stack. So what will happen?
You have to increase the value of top pointer, and then you will insert your
element.
So you have to increment the top and then insert an item, and now your insertion is
done. This is how you have to write the code in your exam paper.
Is that clear to everyone, insert operation?
Yes, sir.
Okay. Yeah, I think let's hold the class for now, okay, because we are already
over time.
But we can cover the remaining stack operations because there are a lot of other
things, stack and then trees, then infix to postfix, postfix to prefix.
Again, these are the very important questions from the exam standpoint.
So we will cover all these things in the next class.
Okay, sir.
Okay, cool. Thank you so much for joining. See you all in the next class.
Thanks.
Thank you.
